Located throughout REVEL,
quizzing affords students
opportunities to check their
understanding at regular
intervals before moving on.
REVEL enables students to read and interact with
course material on the devices they use, anywhere and
anytime. Responsive design allows students to access
REVEL on their tablet devices, with content displayed
clearly in both portrait and landscape view.
Highlighting, note taking, and a glossary personalize
the learning experience. Educators can add notes for
students, too, including reminders or study tips.
REVEL’s variety of writing
activities and assignments
develop and assess concept
mastery and critical
thinking.
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 1 11/19/14 8:31 PM
ii
Superior assignability and tracking
REVEL’s assignability and tracking tools help educators make sure students are completing
their reading and understanding core concepts.
REVEL allows educators to indicate precisely which
readings must be completed on which dates. This clear,
detailed schedule helps students stay on task and keeps
them motivated throughout the course.
REVEL lets educators monitor class assignment completion
and individual student achievement. It offers actionable
information that helps educators intersect with their students
in meaningful ways, such as points earned on quizzes and
time on task.
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 2 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Public Speaking
Handbook
Fifth Edition
Steven A. Beebe
Texas State University
Susan J. Beebe
Texas State University
Boston Columbus Indianapolis New York San Francisco
Amsterdam Cape Town Dubai London Madrid Milan Munich Paris Montreal Toronto
Delhi Mexico City São Paulo Sydney Hong Kong Seoul Singapore Taipei Tokyo
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 3 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Publisher, Communication: Karon Bowers
Editorial Assistant: Kieran Fleming
Senior Field Marketing Manager: Blair Zoe Tuckman
Product Marketing Manager: Becky Rowland
Marketing Assistant: Karen Tanico
Senior Managing Editor: Linda Behrens
Procurement Manager: Mary Fischer
Senior Procurement Specialist: Mary Ann Gloriande
Program Manager: Anne Ricigliano
Project Manager: Maria Piper
Associate Creative Director: Blair Brown
Senior Art Director: Maria Lange
Cover Design: Pentagram
Cover Illustration: Greg Betza
Digital Media Specialist: Sean Silver
Full-Service Project Management and Composition: Cenveo® Publisher
 Services
Printer/Binder: R.R. Donnelley-Crawfordsville
Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color/Hagerstown
Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and
­
reproduced, with permission, in this ­
textbook appear on the appropriate
page of appearance or in the Credits on pages 474–479.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Beebe, Steven A., Date – author.
  Public speaking handbook/Steven A. Beebe, Texas State University-San Marcos; Susan J. Beebe, Texas
State University-San Marcos. — Fifth Edition.
       pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-13-375398-1
 1.  Public speaking. 2.  Oral communication.  I. Beebe, Susan J., author. II. Title.
  PN4129.15.B44 2014
  808.5’1—dc23
                                                            2014044489
ISBN 10: 0-13-388304-3
ISBN 13: 978-0-13-388304-6
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1—DOC—17 16 15 14
Copyright © 2016, 2013, 2010 by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the
United States of America. This publication is protected by copyright, and permission should be obtained
from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise. For information
regarding permissions, request forms and the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global
Rights & Permissions department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
This work is solely for
the use of ­
instructors
and administrators
for the purpose of
teaching courses and
assessing student
learning. Unauthorized
dissemination,
­
publication or sale
of the work, in whole
or in part (including
posting on the
­
internet) will destroy
the integrity of the
work and is strictly
prohibited.
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 4 11/27/14 4:18 PM
Dedicated to our parents,
Russell and Muriel Beebe
and Herb and Jane Dye
and to our children,
Mark, Matthew, and Brittany Beebe
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 5 11/19/14 8:31 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
vii
Prefacexii
Part 1  Introduction
	1	 Introduction to Public
Speaking1
What Is Public Speaking? 2
Why Study Public Speaking? 3
Quick Check  Why Study Public
Speaking?4
Public Speaking as a Communication
Process5
Quick Check  The Communication
Process 8
The Rich Heritage of Public Speaking 8
Quick Check  The Rich Heritage of
Public Speaking 11
	2	 Speaking with Confidence 15
Understand Your Nervousness 17
HOW TO  Make Your Understanding
of Anxiety Work for You 18
Quick Check  Understand Your
Nervousness 20
Build Your Confidence 21
HOW TO  Channel Your Energy 23
HOW TO  Get and Give Support in
Public-Speaking Class 25
Quick Check  Build Your Confidence 26
	3	 Presenting Your First Speech 29
Consider Your Audience 31
Select and Narrow Your Topic 32
HOW TO  Pick a Speech Topic 33
Determine Your Purpose 33
HOW TO  Develop and Use a
Specific Purpose 34
Develop Your Central Idea 35
Generate the Main Ideas 35
HOW TO  Identify the Main Ideas
in Your Speech 36
Gather Supporting Material 36
Organize Your Speech 38
SAMPLE OUTLINE 39
Rehearse Your Speech 41
Deliver Your Speech 42
SAMPLE SPEECH Cinderella by Grace
Hildenbrand 43
	4	 Speaking Freely and Ethically 49
Speaking Credibly 50
Speaking Freely 51
Quick Check  History of Free Speech
in the United States 54
Speaking Ethically 55
HOW TO  Incorporate an Oral Citation
into Your Speech 60
Quick Check  The Ethical Public
Speaker . . . 61
Part 2  Analyzing an Audience
	5	 Listening to Speeches 65
Effective Listening 67
Quick Check  Effective Listening 69
Overcoming Barriers to Effective
Listening 69
HOW TO  Prevent Information
Overload 70
HOW TO  Minimize Outside
Distractions 71
HOW TO  Counteract Prejudice 72
How to Become a Better Listener 73
HOW TO  Become an Active Listener 79
Contents
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 7 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Listening and Critical Thinking 81
Quick Check  Critical Thinking and
Listening 84
Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches 84
Quick Check  Giving Good Feedback 91
	6	 Analyzing Your Audience 95
Becoming an Audience-Centered
Speaker 97
HOW TO  Become an Audience-Centered
Speaker 98
Gathering Information about Your
Audience 98
HOW TO  Develop a Survey 100
Analyzing Information about Your
Audience 101
Quick Check  Analyzing Audience
Information 103
Adapting to Your Audience 103
Analyzing Your Audience before
You Speak 105
HOW TO  Use Diverse Strategies 113
Quick Check  Adapting to Diverse
Listeners 114
Quick Check  The Speaking Situation 119
Adapting to Your Audience as You
Speak 120
Quick Check  Customizing Your
Message 124
Analyzing Your Audience after You
Speak 125
Quick Check  Ways to Analyze Your
Audience after Speaking 127
Part 3  Preparing a Speech
	7	 Developing Your Speech 131
Select and Narrow Your Topic 133
HOW TO  Brainstorm for a Topic 137
Quick Check  Selecting a Topic 138
HOW TO  Narrow Your Topic 139
Determine Your Purpose 139
Quick Check  General Purposes for
Speeches 141
HOW TO  Formulate Your
Specific-Purpose Statement 142
Develop Your Central Idea 143
Generate and Preview Your Main
Ideas 146
HOW TO  Determine Your Main
Ideas 147
Meanwhile, Back at the Computer . . . 149
	8	 Gathering and Using
Supporting Material 153
Sources of Supporting Material 154
HOW TO  Find and Use Online
Databases 158
Quick Check  Supporting Material
in the Library 160
Research Strategies 162
HOW TO  Take Effective Notes from
Your Sources 164
Quick Check  Research Strategies 164
Types of Supporting Material 164
HOW TO  Use Illustrations in Your
Speech 166
Quick Check  Select Effective Statistics 173
Quick Check  Types of Supporting
Material 176
The Best Supporting Material 176
Part 4  Crafting a Speech
	9	 Organizing and Outlining
Your Speech 181
Organizing Your Main Ideas 183
Quick Check  Primacy, Recency, and
Complexity 186
Quick Check  Organizing Your Main
Points 190
Integrating Your Supporting Material 191
Quick Check  Integrating Your
Supporting Material 194
viii Contents
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 8 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Organizing Your Presentation for the
Ears of Others: Signposting 194
Quick Check  Types of Signposts 198
Outlining Your Speech 198
HOW TO  Evaluate Your Speech Using
Your Preparation Outline 202
SAMPLE PREPARATION OUTLINE 203
Quick Check  Two Types of Speech
Outlines 207
	10	 Introducing Your Speech 211
Purposes of Introductions 213
Quick Check  Does Your Introduction
Accomplish Its Purpose? 216
Effective Introductions 217
HOW TO  Deliver an Opening Question 221
Quick Check  Effective Introductions 224
	11	 Concluding Your Speech 227
Purposes of Conclusions 228
HOW TO  Signal the End of Your
Speech 230
Quick Check  Purposes of Your Speech
Conclusion 231
Effective Conclusions 231
Quick Check  Effective Conclusions 233
	12	 Using Words Well: Speaker
Language and Style 235
Differentiating Oral and Written
Language Styles 237
Quick Check  Oral versus Written
Style 238
Using Words Effectively 238
Adapting Your Language Style to
Diverse Listeners 242
HOW TO  Avoid Sexist Language 243
Quick Check  Adapting Your Language
Style to Diverse Listeners 244
Crafting Memorable Word Structures 244
Quick Check  Word Structures with
Figurative Imagery 246
Quick Check  Word Structures with
Drama 247
Quick Check  Word Structures with
Cadence 249
Part 5  Delivering a Speech
	13	 Delivering Your Speech 253
The Power of Speech Delivery 255
Quick Check  The Power of Speech
Delivery 257
Methods of Delivery 257
HOW TO  Give an Impromptu
Presentation 260
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 261
HOW TO  Use Eye Contact Effectively 263
HOW TO  Gesture Effectively 266
Quick Check  Characteristics of Good
Vocal Delivery 274
HOW TO  Use a Stationary
Microphone 275
Audience Diversity and Delivery 276
HOW TO  Work Well with a Translator 278
Rehearsing Your Speech: Some
Final Tips 278
Delivering Your Speech 280
Responding to Questions 282
	14	 Designing and Using
Presentation Aids 289
The Value of Presentation Aids 291
Quick Check  The Value of
Presentation Aids 293
Types of Presentation Aids 293
HOW TO  Use People as Presentation
Aids 294
Quick Check  Types of Presentation
Aids 304
Guidelines for Developing
Presentation Aids 305
Quick Check  Guidelines for
Developing Presentation Aids 307
Contents ix
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 9 11/19/14 8:31 PM
x Contents
Guidelines for Using Presentation
Aids 307
Quick Check  Guidelines for Using
Presentation Aids 312
Part 6  Types of Speeches
	15	 Speaking to Inform 315
Goals of Informative Speeches 317
Quick Check  Goals of Informative
Speeches 317
Types of Informative Speeches 318
Strategies to Enhance Audience
Understanding 324
HOW TO  Enhance Message Clarity 325
HOW TO  Paint a Word Picture 327
Quick Check  Enhancing Audience
Understanding 328
Strategies to Maintain Audience
Interest 328
HOW TO  Tell a Good Story 330
SAMPLE INFORMATIVE speech 
Choosing a Speech Topic
by Roger Fringer 331
Quick Check  Keeping the Audience
Interested 332
Strategies to Enhance Audience Recall 333
Quick Check  Enhancing Audience
Recall 335
Developing an Audience-Centered
Informative Speech 335
HOW TO  Formulate Your Informative
Specific-Purpose Statement 337
Quick Check Audience-Centered
Informative Speaking 339
	16	 Understanding Principles of
Persuasive Speaking 343
The Goals of Persuasion 345
Quick Check  Goals of Persuasion 348
How Persuasion Works 348
Quick Check  Models of Persuasion 351
How to Motivate Listeners 352
HOW TO  Use Cognitive Dissonance to
Persuade 353
Quick Check  Coping with Cognitive
Dissonance 355
Quick Check  Using Fear Appeals
Effectively 360
How to Develop Your Persuasive
Speech 360
HOW TO  Pick a Persuasive Speech
Topic 362
Quick Check Audience-Centered
Persuasive Speaking 368
	17	 Using Persuasive Strategies 371
Enhancing Your Credibility 372
Quick Check  Enhancing Your
Credibility 375
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 376
HOW TO  Test the Validity of Inductive
Reasoning 377
HOW TO Test the Truth of a Deductive
Argument 380
Quick Check  Avoid These Fallacies 388
Using Emotion to Persuade 389
Quick Check  Tips for Using Emotion
to Persuade 394
Strategies for Adapting Ideas to People
and People to Ideas 394
HOW TO  Correct an Audience’s
Misconceptions 398
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive
Messages 398
SAMPLE PERSUASIVE SPEECH  You
Are What You Eat: Why You Should Eat
Grass-Fed Organic Beef by Colter Ray 400
	18	 Speaking for Special
Occasions and Purposes 413
Public Speaking in the Workplace 415
Quick Check  Tips for Successful
Group Presentations 418
Ceremonial Speaking  420
HOW TO  Present an Award 422
HOW TO  Accept an Award 424
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 10 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Contents xi
Quick Check  Types of Ceremonial
Speeches 427
After-Dinner Speaking: Using Humor
Effectively 427
Part 7  Appendixes
	A	 Speaking in Small Groups 435
Understanding Small Group
Communication 435
Solving Problems in Groups
and Teams 436
Quick Check  Steps in Problem
Solving 440
Participating in Small Groups 440
Leading Small Groups 441
Quick Check  Characteristics of
Effective Leaders 444
	B	 Speeches for Analysis and
Discussion 445
I Have a Dream
  Martin Luther King Jr. 445
Second Inaugural Address
  Barack Obama 447
Message. Messenger. Audience.
  Daniel Rose 450
Elvis
  Angelitta Armijo 453
Notes 455
Glossary 469
Text Credits 474
Photo Credits 478
Index 480
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 11 11/19/14 8:46 PM
xii
Preface
T
he Public Speaking Handbook, Fifth Edition,
is an adaptation of the ­
successful ninth
edition of Public Speaking: An Audience-
Centered Approach. The ­
distinguishing focus of the
book remains our audience-centered approach.
As in the development of the previous editions,
we have listened to students and ­
instructors to
make the fifth edition an even more useful tool
to help students improve their public speaking
­
abilities. The goal of this edition of the Public
Speaking Handbook is to be a practical and friendly
resource to help students of public speaking
­
connect their hearts and minds with those of
­
listeners. ­
Available both in REVEL as well as in
its traditional spiral-bound format, this new edi-
tion of the Public Speaking Handbook is audience-
centered in its own right: it encourages students
to become more involved in their own learning
process.
New to the Fifth
Edition
REVEL™
Educational technology designed for the way
­
today’s students read, think, and learn
When students are engaged deeply, they
learn more effectively and perform better in their
courses. This simple fact inspired the creation of
REVEL: an immersive learning experience de-
signed for the way today’s students read, think,
and learn. Built in collaboration with educators
and students nationwide, REVEL is the newest,
fully digital way to deliver respected Pearson
content.
REVEL enlivens course content with ­
media
interactives and assessments—integrated ­
directly
within the authors’ narrative—that provide
­
opportunities for students to read about and
practice course material in tandem. This immer-
sive ­
educational technology boosts student en-
gagement, which leads to better understanding of
­
concepts and improved performance throughout
the course.
Learn more about REVEL
http://www.pearsonhighered.com/revel/
Rather than simply offering opportunities to
read about and study public speaking, REVEL
facilitates deep, engaging interactions with the
concepts that matter most. For ­
example, when
learning about public speaking anxiety, students
are prompted to complete a self-assessment
to gauge their own communication style, and
­
explore ways to improve upon their skills. REVEL
engages students directly and immediately, which
leads to a better understanding of course ­
material.
A wealth of student and instructor ­
resources and
interactive materials can be found within REVEL.
Some of our favorites, include:
•	 Self-Assessments 
	 Self-assessment instruments allow students to
analyze their own communication styles, en-
abling them to learn and grow over the dura-
tion of the course.
•	 Speech Excerpts 
	 Abundant in-text speech excerpts let students
listen to audio clips while they read, bringing
examples to life in a way that a printed text
cannot.
•	 Videos and Video Quizzes 
	 Video examples of sample speeches and
­
expert advice throughout the narrative boost
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 12 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Preface﻿ xiii
mastery, and many enable students to test
their knowledge via self-checks.
•	 Animated Figures 
	 Animated Figures help students understand
hard-to-grasp concepts through interactive
visualizations.
In addition to the immersive learning expe-
rience offered by REVEL, we’ve refined and up-
dated the content in this new edition to create a
powerful and contemporary resource for helping
speakers connect to their audience. We’ve added
several new features and revised features that
both instructors and students have praised.
Support for First Speeches
In response to suggestions from instructors who
use the book, we’ve created a new Chapter 3,
­
Presenting Your First Speech. The chapter gives stu-
dents a concise overview of the audience-centered
speaking model as it offers them suggestions for ef-
fectively and confidently making an initial speech
early in the term of their public-speaking class.
New and Updated Features
In the fifth edition, new Learning Objectives ­appear
at the start of each chapter to provide students
with advance organizers and reading goals for
approaching the chapter. Objectives reappear at
key points in the chapter to help students gauge
their progress and monitor their learning. An
­updated Study Guide at the end each chapter
­
reviews the learning objectives and key terms,
and guides students to thinking critically about
chapter concept sand related ethical issues. We’ve
retained and updated many of our popular How
To boxes to highlight and provide easy reference
to key advice for students as they prepare their
speeches. We’ve also updated our helpful Quick
Check boxes and tables to help students check
their understanding and progress toward their
learning objectives as they read and review for
exams.
New Annotated Speeches
We’ve added new annotated student speeches
and speech examples throughout the book. In
addition, nearly every speech in our revised Ap-
pendix B is new, selected to provide readers with
a variety of positive models of effective speeches.
New Examples and
Illustrations
New examples and illustrations integrated in
every chapter provide both classic and contem-
porary models to help students master the art of
public speaking. As in previous editions, we draw
on both student speeches and speeches delivered
by well-known people.
New Material in Every Chapter
In addition to these new and expanded ­
features,
each chapter has been revised with new ­
examples,
illustrations, and references to the latest research
conclusions. Here’s a summary of the changes
and revisions we’ve made:
Chapter 1: Introduction to Public Speaking
•	 New comparison of public speaking with con-
versation helps build confidence by showing
students that speechmaking builds on skills
they have already mastered.
•	 The benefits of public speaking for ­
improving
employment opportunities and ­
developing
empowering critical thinking skills are
­reinforced.
•	 Expanded summary of the history of public
speaking adds discussion of Roman orators
and of today’s communication technologies.
Chapter 2: Speaking with Confidence
•	 New research and examples help students
understand the sources and nature of public-
speaking anxiety.
•	 Updated research reinforces advice for
­
overcoming speaking anxiety and building
confidence.
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 13 11/19/14 8:31 PM
xiv Preface
Chapter 3: Presenting Your First Speech
•	 This new chapter provides an overview of the
audience-centered speaking process, jump-
starting the speechmaking process for stu-
dents who are assigned to present speeches
early in the term.
•	 Advice is provided for effectively delivering
speeches via videoconferencing and similar
communication technology.
•	 New sample first speech helps students
see how another student speaker success-
fully ­
applied the concepts discussed in the
chapter.
Chapter 4: Speaking Freely and Ethically
•	 A revised and updated discussion of free
speech helps students understand the evolu-
tion of interpretation of the First Amendment.
•	 New discussion and figure emphasize the
global nature of free speech in the era of social
media.
•	 New examples throughout the chapter keep
material current and relevant to readers.
Chapter 5: Listening to Speeches
•	 The chapter is streamlined by removing the
discussion of receiver anxiety as a barrier to
listening.
•	 Updated discussion of listening styles helps
students use the strengths and overcome the
challenges of their particular listening style.
•	 Updated research throughout the chapter
keeps material current and relevant to readers
Chapter 6: Analyzing Your Audience
•	 An updated discussion of sex, gender, and
sexual orientation emphasizes the importance
of considering variations in listeners’ gender
and sexual identities.
Chapter 7: Developing Your Speech
•	 Updated lists of potential speech topics can
spark students’ own topic brainstorms.
•	 New examples throughout the chapter keep
the material in this popular chapter current
and relevant to readers.
Chapter 8: Gathering and Using Supporting
Material
•	 An updated section on evaluating Internet re-
sources adds new discussions of Wikipedia and
page domains as it guides students to think criti-
cally about information they find on the Internet.
•	 New examples throughout the chapter model
effective incorporation of the different types of
supporting material discussed in the chapter.
Chapter 9: Organizing and Outlining Your
Speech
•	 This chapter combines two previously sepa-
rate but closely related chapters on organizing
and outlining speeches.
•	 The combined chapter has been streamlined
by removing the discussion of delivery out-
lines, as they are synonymous with speaking
notes for many speakers.
•	 A revised discussion of signposting helps
­
students understand how these ­
organizational
clues help communicate their message to
­listeners.
•	 The chapter offers information to help students
evaluate technological options, such as using a
tablet computer to hold speaking notes.
•	 A new Sample Preparation Outline gives stu-
dents a complete model of the best practices
in organization and outlining.
Chapter 10: Introducing Your Speech
•	 New examples of effective introductions from
both student and seasoned speakers show
students how to implement the techniques
described in the chapter.
Chapter 11: Concluding Your Speech
•	 New examples of effective conclusions from
both student and seasoned speakers show
students how to implement the techniques
described in the chapter.
Chapter 12: Using Words Well: Speaker
­
Language and Style
•	 New table reinforces students’ understanding
by providing a visual analysis of memorable
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 14 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Preface xv
word structures John F. Kennedy, Jr. used in
his inaugural address.
•	 New examples clarify discussions of meta-
phors, inversion, suspension, parallelism,
­
antithesis, and alliteration.
Chapter 13: Delivering Your Speech
•	 This chapter provides additional guidance in
effective use of eye contact, gestures, and facial
expressions when delivering speeches using
videoconferencing or similar technology.
•	 Discussions of using microphones and ­
proper
attire have been updated with advice on
­current trends.
Chapter 14: Using Presentation Aids
•	 Updated information on two-dimensional
presentation aids discusses using photo-
graphs, drawings, maps, graphs, and charts
the “old-fashioned way,” as well as in
­
computer-generated presentation aids.
•	 The discussion of computer-generated presen-
tation aids has been extended beyond Power-
Point™ to include Prezi™ and Keynote™, two
otherpopularpresentationsoftwareapplications.
•	 New discussions of using video aids and
audio aids include references to current stor-
age technology, such as smartphones, that
makes it easy for speakers to create their own
video or audio aid, as well as an evaluation of
cloud storage of presentation aids.
Chapter 15: Speaking to Inform
•	 New information on storytelling helps
­
students understand the universal appeal of
stories and their use in gaining and maintain-
ing listeners’ attention.
•	 New examples and updated research through-
out the chapter keep material current and
­
relevant to readers.
Chapter 16: Understanding Principles of
­Persuasive Speaking
•	 Expanded discussion and examples clarify
and enhance students’ understanding of
­
cognitive dissonance theory.
•	 Clarifications and examples help students
­
understand theories related to persuasion and
how those theories are applied at every step of
the audience-centered speaking model to their
persuasive speeches.
Chapter 17: Using Persuasive Strategies
•	 New section on reasoning by sign expands the
repertoire of reasoning techniques students
can use in their persuasive speeches.
•	 Advice for adapting persuasive techniques
to culturally diverse audiences has been
­
enhanced by introducing each technique with
a reminder of the central role of the audience
in public speaking.
•	 A new Sample Persuasive Speech gives stu-
dents a complete model of how to use the
motivated sequence and other principles of
persuasion.
Chapter 18: Speaking for Special Occasions
and Purposes
•	 New chapter-opening examples reinforce the
value of public speaking with dollars-and-
cents evidence.
•	 New examples throughout the chapter dem-
onstrate models of speeches for ceremonial
­
occasions including commencement address-
es, keynote addresses, and eulogies, as well as
humorous speeches.
Successful Features
Retained in This Edition
While adding powerful new features and ­
content
to help students become skilled public ­speakers, we
have also endeavored to keep what ­
students and
instructors liked best. Specifically, we retained five
areas of focus that have proven successful in pre-
vious editions: our audience-centered ­
approach;
our focus on overcoming ­
communication appre-
hension; our focus on ­
ethics; our focus on diver-
sity; and our focus on skill ­
development. We also
continue our partnership with instructors and
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 15 11/19/14 8:31 PM
xvi Preface
students by offering a wide array of supplements
to support teaching and learning.
Our Audience-Centered
Approach
Over 2,300 years ago, Aristotle said, “For of
the three elements in speechmaking—speaker,
­
subject, and person addressed—it is the last one,
the hearer, that determines the speaker’s end
and object.” We think Aristotle was right. A good
speech centers on the needs, values, and hopes
of the audience, who should be foremost in the
speaker’s mind during every step of the speech
development and delivery process.
Our audience-centered model integrates the
step-by-step process of speech preparation and
delivery with the ongoing process of considering
the audience. After introducing the model, as we
discuss presenting your first speech, in ­
Chapter 3,
we ­
continue to emphasize the centrality of con-
sidering the audience by revisiting it at appropri-
ate points throughout the book.
12 o’clock position with “Select and Narrow
Topic” and moves around the model clock-
wise to ­
“Deliver Speech.”
•	 Consider the audience. Each step of the
speech construction process touches the center
portion of the model, labeled “Consider the
Audience.” Arrows connect the center with
each step of the process to emphasize that the
audience influences each of the steps involved
in designing and presenting a speech.
•	 Revise to improve your speech. Arrows point
in both directions around the central process
of “Consider the Audience” to remind you
that a speaker may sometimes revise a previ-
ous step to incorporate further information or
additional thoughts about the audience.
Our Focus on Reducing
Communication Apprehension
To help students to overcome their apprehen-
sion of speaking to others, we have devoted an
­
entire chapter (Chapter 2) to a discussion of how
to manage communication apprehension. We’ve
updated our discussion in this edition, adding the
most contemporary research conclusions we can
find to help students overcome the anxiety that
many people experience when speaking publicly.
Our Focus on Ethics
Being audience-centered does not mean that
a speaker tells an audience only what they
want to hear. Audience-centered speakers
­
articulate truthful messages that give audience
­
members free choice in responding to a mes-
sage, while they also use effective means of
ensuring ­
message clarity and credibility. From
the first chapter onward, we link being an
­
audience-centered speaker with being an ethi-
cal speaker. We not only devote an entire chap-
ter (Chapter 4) to being an ethical speaker, but
we also offer reminders, tips, and strategies
for making ethical speaking and listening an
Here’s how to use the model:
•	 Start at the top. Viewing the model as a
clock, the speaker begins the process at the
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 16 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Preface xvii
integral part of human communication. As part
of the Study Guide at the end of each chapter,
students and instructors will find questions to
spark discussion about and raise awareness of
ethical issues in effective speechmaking.
Our Focus on Diversity
To be audience-centered is to acknowledge the
various ethnic and cultural backgrounds, atti-
tudes, beliefs, values, and other differences pres-
ent when people assemble to hear a speech. The
topic of adapting to diverse audiences is inte-
grated into every step of our audience-centered
approach.
Our Focus on Skill
Development
We are grateful for our ongoing collaboration
with public-speaking teachers, many of whom
have used our audience-centered approach for
nearly two ­
decades. We have retained those
skill-development features of previous editions
that both teachers and students have applauded.
What instructors tell us most often is “You write
like I teach” or “Your book echoes the same kind
of ­
advice and skill development suggestions
that I give my students.” We are gratified by
the ­
continued popularity of the Public Speaking
Handbook.
•	 Clear and Interesting Writing Style  Read-
ers have especially valued our polished prose,
concise style, and engaging, lively voice.
­
Students tell us that reading our book is like
having a conversation with their instructor.
•	 OutstandingExamples  Not only do ­
students
need to be told how to speak effectively, they
need to be shown how to speak well. Our
powerful and interesting examples, both
­
classic and contemporary and drawn from
both student speakers and famous ­
orators,
continue to resonate with student speakers.
•	 Built-in Learning Resources  In the fifth edi-
tion, we have moved chapter outlines to the
opening pages of chapters, to provide imme-
diate previews; added learning objectives that
help students set goals and gauge their prog-
ress; retained our Quick Check boxes after
nearly every major section of the text, and
provided a newly consolidated Study Guide
at the end of each chapter.
Our Partnership
with Instructors and
Students
Public speaking students rarely learn how to be
­
articulate speakers only from reading a book.
­
Students learn best in partnership with an expe-
rienced instructor who can guide them through
the process of being an audience-centered
speaker. And experienced instructors rely on
the some support from textbook publishers. To
support ­
instructors and students who use the
Public Speaking Handbook, Pearson offers vari-
ous ­
supplements, previewed below with more
detailed descriptions available online and from
your Pearson representative.
Instructor and Student
Resources
Key instructor resources include an Instructor’s
Manual (ISBN 0-13-388308-6), TestBank, (ISBN
0-13-388305-1), and PowerPoint Presentation
Package (ISBN 0-13-388306-X). These supple-
ments are available at www.pearsonhighered
.com/irc (instructor login required). MyTest online
test-generating software (ISBN 0-13-388303-5) is
available at www.pearsonmytest.com (instructor
login required). For a complete list of the instruc-
tor and student resources available with the text,
please visit the Pearson Communication catalog,
at www.pearsonhighered.com/communication.
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 17 11/19/14 8:31 PM
xviii Preface
Pearson MediaShare
Pearson’s comprehensive media upload tool
­
allows students to post video, images, audio,
or documents for instructor and peer viewing,
time-stamped commenting, and assessment.
­
MediaShare is an easy, mobile way for students
and professors to interact and engage with
speeches, presentation aids, group projects, and
other files. MediaShare gives professors the tools
to provide contextual feedback to demonstrate
how students can improve their skills.
Structured like a social networking site,
­
MediaShare helps promote a sense of community
among students. In face-to-face and online course
settings, MediaShare saves instructors valuable
time and enriches the student learning experience
by providing contextual feedback.
•	 Use MediaShare to assign or view speeches,
outlines, presentation aids, video-based
­
assignments, role plays, group projects, and
more in a variety of formats including video,
Word, PowerPoint, and Excel.
•	 Assess students using customizable, Pearson-
provided rubrics or create your own around
classroom goals, learning outcomes, or
­department initiatives.
•	 Set up assignments for students with ­
options
for full-class viewing and commenting, pri-
vate comments between you and the student,
peer groups for reviewing, or as collaborative
group assignments.
•	 Record video directly from a tablet, phone,
or other webcam (including a batch upload
­
option for instructors) and tag submissions to
a specific student or assignment.
•	 Embed video from YouTube via assignments
to incorporate current events into the class-
room experience.
•	 Set up quiz questions on video assignments
to ensure students master concepts and
­
interact and engage with the media.
•	 Import grades into most learning manage-
ment systems.
•	 Ensure a secure learning environment for
instructors and students through robust
­privacy settings.
•	 Upload videos, comment on submissions,
and grade directly from our new MediaShare
app, available free from the iTunes store and
GooglePlay; search for Pearson MediaShare.
Pearson MediaShare is available as a stand-
alone product, as part of MyCommunicationLab,
or in a package with REVEL.
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 18 11/19/14 8:31 PM
Preface xix
Acknowledgments
Writing a book is a partnership not only between
authors but also with many people who have
­
offered us the benefit of their experience and
advice about how to make this the best possible
teaching and learning resource. We appreciate all
of the authors and speakers we have quoted or
referenced; their words and wisdom have added
resonance to our knowledge and richness to our
advice. We are grateful for our students, col-
leagues, adopters, friends, and the editorial team
at Pearson.
Many reviewers have helped us shape the
content and features of this text since it first pub-
lished. These talented public-speaking teachers
have supplemented our experience to help us
make decisions about how to present and orga-
nize the content of this book. We express our sin-
cere appreciation to the following reviewers who
have shared their advice, wisdom, and expertise
as we prepared this new edition:
Allison Ainsworth, University of North Geor-
gia; Jennifer Chin, University of North Carolina
Wilmington; Diana Cooley, Lone Star College -
North Harris; TJ Jenkins, Nova ­
Southeastern Uni-
versity; Tressa Kelly - ­
University of West Florida;
Carol-Lynn Perez - San Jose State University and
Sierra College; Emily Plec, ­
Western ­
Oregon Uni-
versity; and Donna ­
Thomsen, Johnson & Wales
University.
Our editorial support team at Pearson, Pub-
lisher Karon Bowers, and Developmental Editor
Sheralee Connors, have done another outstand-
ing job of offering skilled advice to make this a
better book.
Finally, we value the patience, encouragement,
proud support, and love of our sons and daughter-
in-law, Mark, Matthew and Brittany Beebe. They
continue to be our most important audience.
Steven A. Beebe
Susan J. Beebe
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 19 11/19/14 8:31 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
Part 1
Introduction
Chapter 1	 Introduction to Public Speaking
Chapter 2	 Speaking with Confidence
Chapter 3	 Presenting Your First Speech
Chapter 4	 Speaking Freely and Ethically
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Introduction
Chapters
1-4
1
M01A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB1 copy.indd 1 11/18/14 8:14 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Chapter 1  Introduction to Public Speaking
1.	 List and explain in your own words the two major benefits of studying public speaking.
2.	 Why are you taking this course in public speaking? What do you hope to gain from the
course?
Chapter 2  Speaking with Confidence
1.	 What is one negative thought you have about public speaking? What positive self-talk
can you think of to replace it?
2.	 What advice from this chapter do you believe will be most helpful to you when you give
speeches in class?
Chapter 3  Presenting Your First Speech
1.	 What are four characteristics of effective supporting material?
2.	 Write a specific-purpose statement for a speech you could give at some point during this
course.
Chapter 4  Speaking Freely and Ethically
1.	 List the five characteristics of an ethical speaker.
2.	 How can social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter best develop policies that
protect free speech, given their widely diverse audiences that include international
users, commercial users, and political dissidents?
Introduction
Chapters
1-4
1
M01A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB1 copy.indd 2 11/18/14 8:14 PM
1
Chapter 1
Introduction to
Public Speaking
“I’ll pay more for
a person’s ability
to speak and
express himself
than for any other
quality he might
possess.”1
—Charles M. Schwab
	1.1	What Is Public Speaking?
	1.2	Why Study Public Speaking?
Empowerment
Employment
	1.3	Public Speaking as a Communication
Process
Communication as Action
Communication as Interaction
Communication as Transaction
	1.4	The Rich Heritage of Public Speaking
The Golden Age of Public Speaking
Nineteenth- and Twentieth-
Century Age of Political Oratory
The Technological Age of Public
Speaking
Your Speeches in Today’s Age of
Public Speaking
Outline
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 1 11/4/14 12:14 PM
2 Introduction to Public Speaking
1.1
Learning Objectives
	1.1	Compare and contrast public speaking and conversation.
	1.2	Explain why it is important to study public speaking.
	1.3	Sketch and explain a model that illustrates the components and the
process of communication.
	1.4	Discuss in brief the history of public speaking.
Perhaps you think you have heard this speaker—or even taken a class from him:
His eyes were buried in his script. His words in monotone emerged
haltingly from behind his mustache, losing volume as they were sifted
through hair. Audiences rushed to see and hear him, and after they had
satisfied their eyes, they closed their ears. Ultimately, they turned to
small talk among themselves while the great man droned on.2
The speaker described here in such an unflattering way is none other than
Albert Einstein. Sadly, although the great physicist could attract an audience
with his reputation, he could not sustain their attention and interest because he
lacked good public-speaking skills.
The good news is that this book and this course will provide you with the
knowledge and experience you need to become what Einstein was not: a com-
petent public speaker. Right now, however, gaining that experience might seem
less like an opportunity and more like a daunting task. Why undertake it?
What Is Public Speaking?
1.1	 Compare and contrast public speaking and conversation.
Public speaking is the process of presenting a message to an audience, small or
large. You hear speeches almost every day when watching the news, listening to
an instructor’s lecture, or viewing a late-night comedian.
The skill of public speaking builds upon the same communication processes
you use in your normal, everyday conversations. Speaking in public, however,
requires you to sharpen existing communication skills and to learn and apply
new ones. There are three key differences between conversation and public
speaking:
•	 Public speaking is more prepared than conversation. Although there may be
times when you are asked to speak on the spur of the moment, you will
usually know in advance if you will be expected to give a talk on a specific
1.1
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 2 11/4/14 12:14 PM
3
Why Study Public Speaking? 1.2
occasion. A public speaker may spend hours or even days planning and
practicing his or her speech.
•	 Public speaking is more formal than conversation. The slang or casual language
that we often use in conversation is not appropriate for most public speak-
ing. Audiences expect speakers to use standard English grammar and vo-
cabulary. The nonverbal communication of public speakers is also more
formal than nonverbal behavior in ordinary conversation.
•	 Public speaking involves more clearly defined roles for the speaker and audience
than conversation. During a conversation, there is typically interaction be-
tween speaker and listener. But in public speaking, the roles of speaker
and audience are more clearly defined and remain stable. Although in
some cultures, a call-and-response speaker—audience interaction occurs
(such as saying, “That’s right” or “Amen” in response to a preacher’s ser-
mon),3 audience members rarely interrupt or talk back to speakers during
most speeches.
Why Study Public Speaking?
1.2	 Explain why it is important to study public speaking.
Nearly a half-million college students each year take a public-speaking class,
and two-thirds of those students have had little or no prior public-speaking ex-
perience.4 Why should you join these thousands of other students? Here are two
reasons: By studying public speaking, you will gain long-term advantages re-
lated to empowerment and employment.
Empowerment
The ability to speak with competence and confidence will provide empower-
ment. To be empowered is to have the resources, information, and attitudes that
allow you to take action to achieve a desired goal.
Being a skilled public speaker will give you an edge that other, less
skilled communicators lack—even those who may have superior ideas, train-
ing, or experience. It will position you for greater things. Former presiden-
tial speechwriter James Humes, who labels public speaking “the language
of leadership,” says, “Every time you have to speak—whether it’s in an au-
ditorium, in a company conference room, or even at your own desk—you
are auditioning for leadership.”5 You feel truly empowered when you speak
with confidence, knowing that your ideas are being expressed with convic-
tion and assurance.
One of the empowering resources that you develop by studying public
speaking is critical thinking. To think critically is to be able to listen and analyze
1.2
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 3 11/4/14 12:14 PM
4 Introduction to Public Speaking
1.2
information you hear so that you can judge its accuracy and relevance. Being a
critical thinker and an effective communicator is a powerful and empowering
combination that can also open career opportunities for you.
Employment
If you can speak well, you possess a skill that others will value highly. Whether
you are an entry-level employee or aspire to the highest rung of the corporate
leadership ladder, being able to communicate effectively with others is key to
success in any line of work. The skills that you learn in a public-speaking course,
such as how to ethically adapt information to listeners, organize your ideas, per-
suade others, and hold listeners’ attention, are among the skills that are most
sought by employers. In a nationwide survey, prospective employers of college
graduates said that they seek candidates with “public-speaking and presenta-
tion ability.”6 As Table 1.1 shows, other surveys of personnel managers, both in
the United States and internationally, have confirmed that they consider com-
munication skills to be the top factor in helping graduating college students to
obtain employment.7 Billionaire investor Warren Buffet also suggests that higher
pay might be another employment benefit of learning public speaking, saying,
“If you improve your communication skills, I guarantee you that will earn
50 percent more money over your lifetime.”8
Quick Check
Why Study Public Speaking?
1.	 Empowerment: You will gain confidence and skill in communicating with others.
2.	 Employment: You will enhance your career and leadership opportunities.
Table 1.1  Top Skills Valued by Employers
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Rank
Results of Survey of
Personnel Directors9
Results of Survey
of a College Career
Services Department10
Results of Survey
of Prospective
Employers11
Survey Results
Compiled from Several
Research Studies12
1
Spoken communication
skills
Communication and
interpersonal skills
Communication skills Communication skills
2
Written communication
skills
Intelligence Honesty and integrity Analytical/research skills
3 Listening ability Enthusiasm Teamwork Technical skills
4 Enthusiasm Flexibility Interpersonal skills Flexibility/adaptability
5 Technical competence Leadership Motivation/initiative Interpersonal skills
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 4 11/4/14 12:14 PM
5
Public Speaking as a Communication Process 1.3
Public Speaking as a
Communication Process
1.3	 Sketch and explain a model that illustrates the components and the
process of communication.
Even the earliest communication theorists recognized that all communication is
a process. We’ll look next at a variety of models that theorists have developed
over the decades to describe the communication process.
Communication as Action
The earliest models that communication theorists formulated were linear, sug-
gesting a simple transfer of meaning from a sender to a receiver, as shown in
Figure 1.1. Although theorists later realized that these ideas were too simplistic,
early models did identify most of the elements of the communication process.
We will explain each element as it relates to public speaking.
Source  A public speaker is a source of information and ideas for an audience.
The job of the source or speaker is to encode, or translate, the ideas and images in
his or her mind into verbal or nonverbal symbols (a code) that an audience can
­
recognize. The speaker may encode into words (for example, saying, “The fabric
should be 2 inches square”) or into gestures (showing the size with his or her hands).
Message The message in public speaking is the speech itself—both what is
said and how it is said. If a speaker has trouble finding words to convey his or
her ideas or sends contradictory nonverbal symbols, listeners might not be able
to decode the speaker’s verbal and nonverbal symbols into a message.
Channels  A message is usually transmitted from sender to receiver via two
channels: visual and auditory. Audience members see the speaker and decode his
or her nonverbal symbols—eye contact (or lack of it), facial expressions, posture,
1.3
Figure 1.1 A Model of Communication as Action
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Source Channel Receiver
Noise
Message Message
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 5 11/4/14 12:14 PM
6 Introduction to Public Speaking
1.3
gestures, and dress. If the speaker uses any visual aids, such as graphs or
models, these too are transmitted along the visual channel. The auditory channel
opens as the speaker speaks. Then the audience members hear words and such
vocal cues as inflection, rate, and voice quality.
Receiver The receiver of the message is the individual audience member,
whose decoding of the message will depend on his or her own particular blend
of past experiences, attitudes, beliefs, and values. An effective public speaker
should be receiver- or audience-centered.
Noise  Anything that interferes with the communication of a message is called
noise. Noise may be physical and external or internal. External noise such as a
lawnmower outside, a noisy air conditioner, a crying baby, or incessant cough-
ing can make it difficult for audience members to hear or concentrate on a
speech. Internal noise may stem from either physiological or psychological causes
and may directly affect either the source or the receiver. A bad cold (physiologi-
cal noise) may cloud a speaker’s memory or subdue his or her delivery. An audi-
ence member who is worried about an upcoming exam (psychological noise) is
unlikely to remember much of what the speaker says. Whether it is internal or
external, whether it is physiological or psychological, or whether it originates in
the sender or the receiver, noise interferes with the transmission of a message.
Communication as Interaction
Realizing that linear models were overly simplistic, later communication theo-
rists designed models such as the one in Figure 1.2 that depicted communica-
tion as a more complex process. These models were circular, or interactive, and
added two important new elements: feedback and context.
Figure 1.2 An Interactive Model of Communication
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Feedback
Source Channel Receiver
Noise
Context
Message Message
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 6 11/4/14 12:14 PM
7
Public Speaking as a Communication Process 1.3
Feedback  One way in which public speaking differs from casual conversa-
tion is that the public speaker does most or all of the talking. But public speaking
is still interactive. Without an audience to hear and provide feedback, public
speaking serves little purpose. Skillful public speakers are audience-centered.
They depend on the nods, facial expressions, and murmurings of the audience
to signal them to adjust their rate of speaking, volume, vocabulary, type and
amount of supporting material, and other variables to communicate their mes-
sage successfully.
Context The context of a public-speaking experience is the environment or
situation in which the speech occurs. It includes such elements as the time, the
place, and the speaker’s and audience’s cultural traditions and expectations. To
paraphrase John Donne, no speech is an island—no speech occurs in a vacuum.
Rather, each speech is a blend of circumstances that can never be replicated
­exactly again.
The person whose job it is to deliver an identical message to a number of
different audiences at different times and in different places can attest to the
uniqueness of each speaking context. If the room is hot, crowded, or poorly lit,
these conditions affect both speaker and audience. The audience that hears a
speaker at 10 a.m. is likely to be fresher and more receptive than a 4:30 p.m. audi-
ence. A speaker who fought rush-hour traffic for 90 minutes to arrive at his or
her destination may find it difficult to muster much enthusiasm for delivering
the speech.
Many of the skills that you will learn from this book relate not only to the
preparation of effective speeches (messages) but also to the elements of feedback
and context in the communication process. Our audience-centered approach fo-
cuses on “reading” your listeners’ responses and adjusting to them as you speak.
Communication as Transaction
The most recent communication models do not label individual components.
Transactive models focus instead on communication as a simultaneous process.
As the model in Figure 1.3 suggests, we send and receive messages concurrently.
In a two-person communication transaction, both individuals are sending and
receiving at the same time. When you are listening, you are also expressing your
thoughts and feelings nonverbally. A good public speaker shouldn’t wait until a
speech is over to gauge its effectiveness but, because of the transactive nature of
Source/
Receiver
Receiver/
Source
Figure 1.3 A Transactive Model of Communication
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 7 11/4/14 12:14 PM
8 Introduction to Public Speaking
1.4
communication, should be scanning the audience during the speech for nonver-
bal clues to the audience’s reaction.
Although communication models have been developed only recently, the
elements of these models have long been recognized as the keys to successful
public speaking. As you study public speaking, you will continue a tradition
that goes back to the very beginnings of Western civilization.
Quick Check
The Communication Process
Audience and speaker send messages simultaneously. The process includes these
elements:
•	 The speaker is the source of information.
•	 The message is the speech.
•	 The message is transmitted through visual and auditory channels.
•	 The receiver decodes the message.
•	 Noise (external or internal) interferes with the message.
The Rich Heritage of Public Speaking
1.4	 Discuss in brief the history of public speaking.
Long before the time when many people could read, they listened to public
speakers. Rhetoric is another term for the use of words and symbols to achieve
a goal. Although rhetoric is often defined as the art of speaking or writing aimed
at persuading others (changing or reinforcing attitudes, beliefs, values, or be-
havior), you are using rhetoric whether you’re informing, persuading, or even
entertaining listeners, because you are trying to achieve a goal.
The Golden Age of Public Speaking
The fourth century b.c.e. was a golden age for rhetoric in the Greek Republic,
because it was during this time that the philosopher Aristotle formulated guide-
lines for speakers that we still follow today. Roman orators continued the Greek
rhetorical tradition. Two famous Romans, Cicero and Quintilian, both sought to
define the qualities of the “true” orator. On a lighter note, it is said that Roman
orators invented the necktie; fearing laryngitis, they wore “chin cloths” to pro-
tect their throats.13
Centuries later in medieval Europe, the clergy were the most polished pub-
lic speakers. In the 1500s, Europeans gathered eagerly to hear Martin Luther
expound his Articles of Faith. In the 1700s, colonists in what would one day be-
come the United States listened to the impassioned speeches of patriots.
1.4
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 8 11/4/14 12:14 PM
9
The Rich Heritage of Public Speaking 1.4
Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century Age of
Political Oratory
Vast nineteenth-century audiences heard speakers such as Henry Clay and
Daniel Webster debate states’ rights; they listened to Frederick Douglass,
Angelina Grimke, and Sojourner Truth argue for the abolition of slavery and
to Lucretia Mott plead for women’s suffrage; they gathered for an evening’s
entertainment to hear Mark Twain as he traveled the lecture circuits of the
frontier.
Students of nineteenth-century public speaking spent very little time de-
veloping their own speeches. Instead, they practiced the art of declamation—
the delivery of an already famous address. Favorite subjects for declamation
included speeches by Americans such as Patrick Henry and William Jennings
Bryan and British orator Edmund Burke.
Hand in hand with declamation went the study and practice of elocution,
the expression of emotion through posture, movement, gestures, facial expres-
sion, and voice. From the mid-nineteenth century to the early twentieth century,
elocution manuals, providing elaborate and specific prescriptions for effective
delivery, were standard references not only in schools but also in nearly every
middle-class home in the United States.14
The Technological Age of Public Speaking
In the first half of the twentieth century, radio made it possible for people around
the world to hear Franklin Delano Roosevelt decry December 7, 1941, as “a date
which will live in infamy” following the attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. In the
last half of the century, television was the medium through which audiences saw
and heard the most stirring speeches:
•	 Martin Luther King Jr. proclaiming his dream of equality
•	 Ronald Reagan beseeching Mikhail Gorbachev to “tear down this wall”
•	 Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel looking beyond the end of one millennium
toward the next with “profound fear and extraordinary hope”
With the twenty-first century dawned a new era of speechmaking. It was
to be an era that would draw on age-old public-speaking traditions—an era in
which U.S. soldiers serving in Iraq and Afghanistan would watch their chil-
dren’s commencement addresses live via streaming video. And it was to be an
era that would summon public speakers to meet some of the most difficult chal-
lenges in history—an era in which a U.S. president would empathize with the
grief felt by the community of Newtown, Connecticut, after 20 young children
and six adults were shot to death at Sandy Hook Elementary School, telling lis-
teners that “ . . . you’re not alone in your grief; that our world too has been torn
apart; that all across this land of ours, we have wept with you, we’ve pulled our
children tight.”15
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 9 11/4/14 12:14 PM
10 Introduction to Public Speaking
1.4
Your Speeches in Today’s Age of Public Speaking
Today, you may be more likely to hear a speech after it has been recorded as a
YouTube video or a podcast and delivered on your smartphone or other digi-
tal device than you are a live-and-in-person presentation. In fact, you may be
taking this course in an online format and may present your speeches to your
classmates and instructor as video recordings. Although the electronic context
of the message influences both how the message may be prepared and received,
the primary process of developing and presenting your speech is the same as it
has been for centuries. The ancient Romans identified five classical canons, or
elements of preparing and presenting a speech:
•	 Invention: the creative process of developing your ideas
•	 Arrangement: how the speech is organized
•	 Style: your choice of words
•	 Memory: the extent to which you use notes or rely on your memory to share
your ideas
•	 Delivery: the nonverbal expression of your message
Whether you are presenting your message in person or via video, you will
find that these same five elements will shape how your audience responds to
your message. You and other speakers in the future can draw on the long and
rich heritage as you forge new frontiers in public speaking.
Another unchanging truth of public speaking is that the core of all you do
in public speaking is a focus on your audience. Your audience will ultimately
Aristotle, Daniel Webster, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt were all great speakers of their eras.
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 10 11/4/14 12:15 PM
11
The Rich Heritage of Public Speaking 1.4
determine if your message has achieved your objective. For this reason, we sug-
gest that you keep your audience foremost in your mind from the first moments
of thinking about your speech. In Chapter 3, we present a step-by-step guide
to preparing any speech that will connect speaker to audience regardless of the
channel used.
Quick Check
The Rich Heritage of Public Speaking
Period Event
Fourth to first centuries b.c.e. Greek rhetoric flourishes in the Age of Aristotle. Roman orators continue the tradition.
Sixteenth century European clergy are the primary practitioners of public speaking.
Eighteenth century American patriots make impassioned public pleas for independence.
Nineteenth century Abolitionists and suffragists speak out for change; frontier lecture circuits flourish.
Twentieth century Electronic media first make possible vast audiences.
Twenty-first century Speakers adapt centuries-old traditions of public speaking to rapidly evolving technol-
ogy and media.
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 11 11/4/14 12:15 PM
12 Chapter 1 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
1.1	 Compare and contrast public speaking and conversation.
Public speaking—presenting a message to an audience—is similar to conversa-
tion in that it requires focus, expression, and adapting to an audience. However,
public speaking is more planned, more formal, and has more defined roles for
speakers than conversation.
Key Term
Public speaking
1.2	 Explain why it is important to study public speaking.
Since you are highly likely to be called on to speak in public, skill in public
speaking can empower you. It can also help you secure employment or advance
your career.
Key Terms
Empowerment
Critical thinking
1.3	 Sketch and explain a model that illustrates the components and the
process of communication.
Like other forms of communication, public speaking is a process. Different theo-
rists have explained the communication process as (1) action, by which a source
transmits a message through a channel to a receiver; (2) an interaction, in which
the receiver’s feedback and the context of the communication add to the action;
and (3) a transaction in which source and receiver simultaneously send mes-
sages and build a shared meaning.
Key Terms
Source
Encode
Code
Message
Decode
Channels
Receiver
External noise
Internal noise
Feedback
Context
1.4	 Discuss in brief the history of public speaking.
As you develop your own public-speaking skills, your study will be guided
by experience and knowledge gained over centuries of making and studying
speeches, since the golden age of ancient Greece to today, when you are likely to
watch video of speeches rather than hear them in person.
Key Terms
Rhetoric
Declamation
Elocution
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 12 11/4/14 12:15 PM
13
Chapter 1 study guide
Think about These Questions
•	 How do you think this course in public speaking can help you with your
career goals? With your personal life?
•	 Give an example of internal noise that is affecting you as you read this
question.
•	 Declamation is defined as “the delivery of an already famous address.” Is
it ethical to deliver a speech that was written and/or already delivered by
someone else? Explain your answer.
M01_BEEB3981_05_SE_C01_001-014.indd 13 11/4/14 12:15 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
15
Chapter 2
Speaking with
Confidence
“The mind is a
wonderful thing.
It starts working
the minute you’re
born and never
stops . . . until
you stand up to
speak in public.”
—George Jessel
	2.1	Understand Your Nervousness
Your Biology Affects Your
Psychology
Your Psychology Also Affects Your
Biology
Your Apprehension Follows a
Predictable Pattern
	2.2	Build Your Confidence
Know Your Audience
Don’t Procrastinate
Select an Appropriate Topic
Be Prepared
Be Organized
Know Your Introduction and Your
Conclusion
Make Practice Real
Breathe
Channel Your Nervous Energy
Visualize Your Success
Outline
(continued)
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 15 11/4/14 12:41 PM
16 Speaking with Confidence
2﻿
Learning Objectives
	2.1	Explain the reasons for and processes involved in nervousness about
public speaking.
	2.2	Describe effective strategies for building public-speaking
confidence.
Perhaps public speaking is a required class for you, but because of the anxiety
you feel when you deliver a speech, you’ve put it off as long as possible.
The first bit of comfort we offer is this: It’s normal to be nervous. In a clas-
sic survey seeking to identify people’s phobias, public speaking ranked as the
most anxiety-producing experience most people face. Forty-one percent of all
respondents reported public speaking as their most significant fear; fear of death
ranked only sixth!1 On the basis of these statistics, comedian Jerry Seinfeld sug-
gests, “Given a choice, at a funeral most of us would rather be the one in the
coffin than the one giving the eulogy.” New research continues to confirm that
most people are apprehensive about giving a speech.2 Other studies have found
that more than 80 percent of the population feels anxious when they speak to
an audience.3 Some people find public speaking quite frightening; studies sug-
gest that about 20 percent of all college students are highly apprehensive about
speaking in front of others.4
You may also find comfort in knowing you are not alone in experiencing
speech anxiety. President John F. Kennedy and former British Prime Minister Win-
ston Churchill were both noted for their superb public-speaking skills. When they
spoke, they seemed perfectly at ease. Amazingly, both Kennedy and Churchill
were extremely fearful of speaking in public. The list of famous people who
admit to feeling nervous before they speak may surprise you: Barbra Streisand,
Al Roker, Andrea Bocelli, Mariah Carey, Katie Couric, Julia Roberts, Conan
O’Brien, Carly Simon, and Oprah Winfrey have all reported feeling anxious and
jittery before they speak in public.5 Almost everyone experiences some anxiety
when speaking in public.
The main comfort we offer, however, is this: Even if your anxiety is not
overwhelming, you can benefit from learning some positive approaches that
­
allow your nervousness to work for you.6 In fact, that is the goal of this chapter.
Give Yourself a Mental Pep Talk
Focus on Your Message, Not Your
Fear
Look for Positive Support
Focus on Your Accomplishment,
Not Your Fear
Seek Speaking Opportunities
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 16 11/4/14 12:41 PM
17
Understand Your Nervousness 2.1
Because an understanding of why you feel apprehensive is a good starting point
on the journey to speaking with greater confidence,7 we will first help you to
­
understand why you become nervous. Then we will offer specific strategies
to help you speak with greater comfort and less anxiety.
Understand Your Nervousness
2.1	 Explain the reasons for and processes involved in nervousness about
public speaking.
A study by two communication researchers found that among the causes of
anxiety about public speaking were fear of humiliation, concern about not
being prepared, worry about one’s looks, pressure to perform, personal in-
security, concern that the audience wouldn’t be interested in the speaker or
the speech, lack of experience, fear of making mistakes, and an overall fear of
failure.8 Another study found that men are likely to experience more anxiety
than women are when speaking to people from a culture different from their
own.9 There is also evidence that being a perfectionist may be linked to in-
creased apprehension when speaking to others.10 As you read the list, you
probably found a reason that resonated with you. Most people feel some ner-
vousness when they speak before others. As we’ve said, you’re not alone if you
are apprehensive about giving a speech.11 Understanding why you and many
others may experience apprehension can give you insights into how to better
address your anxiety.12
Your Biology Affects Your Psychology
What makes you feel nervous about speaking in public? Why do your hands
sometimes shake, your knees quiver, your stomach flutter, and your voice seem
to go up an octave? What is happening to you?13 Increasingly, researchers are
concluding that communication apprehension may have a genetic or biological
basis. Some people may inherit a tendency to feel anxious about speaking in
public.14 Some researchers point out that public-speaking apprehension can in-
volve both a trait (a characteristic or general tendency that you may have) and
a state (anxiety triggered by the specific incidence of giving a speech to an audi-
ence).15 You might wonder, “So if I have a biological tendency toward states of
nervousness, is there anything I can do to help manage my fear?” The answer
is yes. You many not be able to change your genetics, but you can enhance your
public-speaking skills and learn strategies to help you feel calmer when speak-
ing in public.16 We discuss many of these strategies in the rest of this chapter.
In the meantime, the How To box shows that what you’ve learned in just these
first few pages can already help you. In addition, a better understanding of the
biological reasons you feel apprehensive is a good starting point on the journey
to speaking with greater confidence and serenity.17
2.1
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 17 11/4/14 12:41 PM
18 Speaking with Confidence
2.1
Your Psychology also Affects Your Biology
Your view of the speaking assignment, your perception of your speaking skill,
and your self-esteem all interact to create anxiety.18 You want to do well, but
you’re not sure that you can or will. Presented with this conflict, your brain
signals your body to switch to its default fight-or-flight mode: You can either
fight to respond to the challenge or flee to avoid the cause of the anxiety. Your
body responds by summoning more energy to respond to the challenge. Your
breathing rate increases, you pump more adrenaline, and you rush more blood
through your veins.19 To put it more technically, you are experiencing physiolog-
ical changes because of your psychological state, which explains why you may
have a more rapid heartbeat, shaking knees and hands, a quivering voice, and
increased perspiration.20 You may also experience butterflies in your stomach
because of changes in your digestive system. As a result of your physical dis-
comfort, you may make less eye contact with your audience, use more vocalized
pauses (such as “Um,” “Ah,” or “You know”), and speak too rapidly. Although
you see your physical responses as hindrances, your brain and body are simply
trying to help you with the task at hand. Sometimes they offer more “help” than
needed, and their assistance is not useful.
Your Apprehension Follows a Predictable Pattern
Research suggests that many people feel most nervous right before they give their
speech, as shown in Figure 2.1.21 If you’re typical, you’ll feel the second-highest
Make Your Understanding of Anxiety Work for You
Don’t let your initial anxiety convince you that you cannot speak effectively. Use what you now know
to manage your fear and anxiety by keeping in mind the following observations:
	1.	
You are going to feel more nervous than you look.  Many students are surprised when
classmates reveal that they felt shaky while giving their speeches. If you worry that you are
going to appear nervous to others, you may, in fact, increase your anxiety. Your body will
exhibit more physical changes to deal with your self-induced state of anxiety. Instead, con-
sciously remind yourself that your audience cannot see evidence of everything you feel.
	2.	
You can’t make it go away.  It is unrealistic to try to eliminate speech anxiety. Instead,
your goal should be to manage your nervousness so that it does not create so much inter-
nal noise that it keeps you from speaking effectively.
	3.	
You can rename anxiety to tame it.  Speakers who label their increased feelings of phys-
iological arousal as “nervousness” are more likely to feel anxious and fearful. But if you can
label the same physiological feelings as “enthusiasm” or “excitement,” the extra adrenaline,
increased blood flow, pupil dilation, increased endorphins to block pain, increased heart
rate, and other physical changes can all improve your energy level and help you to function
better than you might otherwise.
HOW
TO
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 18 11/4/14 12:41 PM
19
Understand Your Nervousness 2.1
level of anxiety at the time your instructor first presents the speech assignment.
You’ll probably feel the least anxiety when you’re preparing your speech.
One practical application of this research is that now you can understand
when you’ll need the most help managing your anxiety: right before you speak.
It will also help to remember that as you begin speaking, anxiety begins to
decrease—often dramatically. Another application of the research is to help you
realize you’ll feel less anxious about your speech when you’re doing something
positive to prepare for it. Don’t put off working on your speech; if you prepare
well in advance, you’ll not only have a better speech, but you’ll also feel less
anxious about presenting it.
To identify patterns in how people experience communication apprehen-
sion, one researcher measured speakers’ heart rates when they were delivering
speeches and also asked them several questions about their fear of speaking.22
After studying the results, he identified four styles of communication apprehension:
•	 Average. You have an average style of communication anxiety if you have a
generally positive approach to communicating in public; your overall heart
rate when speaking publicly is in the average range. Speakers with this style
rated their own speaking performance the highest compared to those with
other styles.
•	 Insensitive. The insensitive style is likely to be your style only if you have had
previous experience in public speaking. Perhaps because of your experi-
ence, you tend to be less sensitive to apprehension when you speak; you
Figure 2.1  Many public speakers feel the most nervous right before their speech
begins, with anxiety tapering off as the speech continues. Students may also feel a
smaller peak of worry when their instructor assigns them to give a speech.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Speech Assignment
Given
Anxiety
Level
You Begin Your
Speech
Speech
High
Low
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 19 11/4/14 12:41 PM
20 Speaking with Confidence
2.1
have a lower heart rate when speaking, and you rate your performance as
moderately successful.
•	 Inflexible. If you have an inflexible style, you have the highest heart rate when
speaking publicly. Some people use this high and inflexible level of anxiety
to enhance their performance. Their fear motivates them to prepare and be
at their best. For others, the anxiety of the inflexible style creates so much
tension that their speaking performance is diminished.
•	 Confrontational. You have a confrontational style if, like many people, you
have a very high heart rate as you begin presenting a speech, and then your
heart rate tapers off to more average levels. This style occurs in people who
report a strong emotional or affective response to speaking and is character-
istic of people with some public-speaking background.
Knowing the style of communication apprehension you have can help you
in at least three ways:
•	 It may help to know that you are not alone in how you experience appre-
hension and that others likely share your feelings.
•	 Having a general idea of your own style may give you greater insight into
how to better manage your apprehension. For example, if you know that
your apprehension tends to spike upward at the very beginning of speaking
to an audience (the confrontational style), you will need to draw on strate-
gies to help manage your anxiety at the outset of your talk.
•	 The research on apprehension styles lends support to the theory that com-
munication apprehension may be a genetic trait or tendency.23 As we’ve
said, that doesn’t mean there’s nothing you can do to manage your anxiety;
it means that, depending on your own tendencies, you may need to learn
more to determine the specific strategies that work best to help you manage
the apprehension you may feel. Read on, because we next discuss a variety
of ways to build your confidence.
Quick Check
Understand Your Nervousness
Keep in mind:
•	 Nervousness is your brain trying to help you.
•	 Nervousness is predictable.
•	 You’ll feel more nervous than you look.
•	 You are not alone.
•	 It’s normal to be nervous.
•	 You can relabel your feelings and use them to your advantage.
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 20 11/4/14 12:41 PM
21
Build Your Confidence 2.2
Build Your Confidence
2.2	 Describe effective strategies for building public-speaking confidence.
Both contemporary research and centuries of experience from seasoned public
speakers suggest some practical advice for managing nervousness when you
give a speech.24
Know Your Audience
Learn as much about your audience as you can. We offer advice on how to gather
information about your listeners in Chapter 6. The more you can anticipate the
kind of reaction your listeners will have to your speech, the more comfortable
you will be in delivering your message.25 As you are preparing your speech,
periodically visualize your listeners’ response to your message. Be audience-
centered rather than speaker-centered; consider their needs, goals, and hopes.
Don’t keep telling yourself how nervous you are going to be.26 An audience-
centered speaker focuses on connecting to listeners rather than focusing on fear.
Don’t Procrastinate
One research study confirmed what you probably already know: Speakers who
are more apprehensive about speaking put off working on their speeches, in con-
trast to speakers who are less anxious about public speaking.27 The lack of thor-
ough preparation often results in a poorer speech performance, reinforcing the
speaker’s perception that public speaking is difficult. Realize that if you fear that
you’ll be nervous when speaking, you’ll tend to put off working on your speech.
Take charge by tackling the speech assignment early, giving yourself every chance
to be successful. Don’t let your fear freeze you into inaction. Prepare early.
Select an Appropriate Topic
You will feel less nervous if you talk about something with which you are famil-
iar or with which you have some personal experience. Judy Shepard, whose son
Matthew Shepard was brutally murdered in 1998 for being gay, describes her
public-speaking course back in college as her “worst nightmare.”28 But today,
because of her fervent belief in her cause, she is a frequent conference speaker
and ardent proponent of gay rights.29 Talking about something you are passion-
ate about can boost your motivation and help you to manage your fear. Your
comfort with the subject of your speech will be reflected in your delivery. In
Chapter 7, we offer more detailed guidance about how to select a topic.
Be Prepared
One formula applies to most speaking situations you are likely to experi-
ence: The better prepared you are, the less anxiety you will experience. Being
2.2
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 21 11/4/14 12:41 PM
22 Speaking with Confidence
2.2
prepared means that you have researched your topic and practiced your speech
several times before you deliver it. One research study found clear evidence that
rehearsing the speech reduces the speaker’s apprehension.30
Be Organized
Being prepared also means that you have developed a logically coherent out-
line, rather than one that is disorganized and difficult to follow. Communication
researcher Melanie Booth-Butterfield has found that speakers’ anxiety about a
speech assignment decreased and their confidence increased when they closely
followed the directions and rules for developing a speech, including following
a clear outline pattern.31 So to help manage your apprehension about speaking,
listen carefully to what the specific assignment is, ask for additional informa-
tion if you’re unclear about the task, and develop a well-organized message. For
most North American listeners, speeches should have a beginning, a middle,
and an end and should follow a logical outline pattern. As we discuss in
Chapter 9, transitional phrases and summaries can also help you to present a
well-structured, easy-to-understand message.
Know Your Introduction and Your Conclusion
You are likely to feel the most anxious during the opening moments of your
speech. Therefore, it is a good idea to have a clear plan for how you will start
your speech. We aren’t suggesting that you memorize your introduction word
for word, but you should have it well in mind. Being familiar with your intro-
duction will help you to feel more comfortable about the entire speech. If you
also know how you will end your speech, you will have a safe harbor in case
you lose your place. If you need to end your speech prematurely, a well-delivered
conclusion can permit you to make a graceful exit.
Make Practice Real
When you practice your speech, imagine that you are giving the speech to the
audience you will actually address. Stand up. Picture what the room looks like
or consider rehearsing in the room in which you will deliver your speech. What
will you be wearing? Practice arising from your seat, walking to the front of
the room, and beginning your speech. Practice aloud rather than just saying the
speech to yourself. A realistic rehearsal will increase your confidence when your
moment to speak arrives.
Breathe
Nervous speakers tend to take short, shallow breaths. To help break this anxiety-
induced breathing pattern, consider taking a few slow, deep breaths before you
rise to speak. No one will be able to detect that you are taking deep breaths if
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 22 11/4/14 12:41 PM
23
Build Your Confidence 2.2
Channel Your Energy
	1.	
Take a walk.  A slow, relaxing walk before you arrive wherever you will be speaking can
help to calm you down and use up some of your excess energy.
	2.	
Squeeze your chair.  When you are seated and waiting to speak, grab the edge of your
chair (without calling attention to what you are doing) and gently squeeze the chair to re-
lease tension. No one needs to know you’re doing this—just squeeze and relax, squeeze
and relax.
	3.	
Tense and relax your muscles.  You can also purposely tense and then release the mus-
cles in your legs and arms while you’re seated. You don’t need to look as though you’re
going into convulsions; just imperceptibly tense and relax your muscles to burn energy.
	4.	
Uncross your legs and wiggle your toes.  Crossing your legs can sometimes cause one
leg or foot to go to sleep. Instead, keep both feet on the floor and gently move your toes to
ensure that all of you will be wide awake and ready to go when it’s your turn to speak.
HOW
TO
you just slowly inhale and exhale. Besides breathing deeply, try to relax your
entire body. Deep breathing and visualizing yourself as successful will help you
to relax.
Channel Your Nervous Energy
One common symptom of being nervous is shaking hands and wobbly knees.
As we noted earlier, what triggers this jiggling is the extra boost of adrenaline
your body is giving you and the resulting energy that has to go somewhere.
Your muscles may move whether you intend them to or not. Take control by
channeling that energy. Use the techniques in the How To box to help you.
As you are waiting to be introduced, focus on remaining calm. Act calm to
feel calm. Give yourself a pep talk; tense and release your muscles to help you
relax. Then, when your name is called, walk to the front of the room in a calm
and collected manner. Before you present your attention-catching opening sen-
tence, take a moment to look for a friendly, supportive face. Think calm and act
calm to feel calm.
Visualize Your Success
Studies suggest that one of the best ways to control anxiety is to imagine a scene
in which you exhibit skill and comfort as a public speaker.32 As you imagine giv-
ing your speech, picture yourself walking confidently to the front of the room
and delivering your well-prepared opening remarks. Visualize yourself giving
the entire speech as a controlled, confident speaker. Imagine yourself calm and
in command. Positive visualization is effective because it boosts your confidence
by helping you to see yourself as a more confident, accomplished speaker.33
Research has found that it is even helpful to look at a picture of someone
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 23 11/4/14 12:41 PM
24 Speaking with Confidence
2.2
confidently and calmly delivering a speech while visualizing yourself giving the
speech.34 It’s especially helpful if the visual image you’re looking at is a person
you can identify with—someone who looks like you or someone you believe is
more like you than not.35 But you could even make a simple drawing of some-
one speaking confidently.36 What’s important is that, as you look at the image,
you imagine that it’s you confidently giving the speech. There is some evidence
that simply believing that a technique can reduce your apprehension may, in
fact, help reduce your apprehension.37
Give Yourself a Mental Pep Talk
Silently giving yourself a pep talk can give you confidence and take your mind
off your nervousness. Giving yourself a positive message such as “I can do this”
can be a productive way to manage your anxiety. Here’s a sample mental speech
that you could deliver to yourself right before you speak: “I know this stuff bet-
ter than anyone else. I’ve practiced it. My message is well organized. I know I
can do it. I’ll do a good job.” Research provides evidence that people who enter-
tain thoughts of worry and failure don’t do themselves any favors.38 When you
feel yourself getting nervous, use positive messages to replace negative thoughts
that may creep into your consciousness. Consider these examples:
Negative Thought
I’m going to forget what I’m sup-
posed to say.
So many people are looking at me.
People think I’m dull and boring.
I just can’t go through with this.
Positive Self-Talk
I’ve practiced this speech many
times. I’ve got notes to prompt me.
If I lose my place, no one will know
I’m not following my outline.
My listeners want me to do a good
job. I’ll seek out friendly faces
when I feel nervous.
I’ve got some good examples. I
can talk to people one-on-one, and
people seem to like me.
I can do this! I’ve talked to people
all my life. I’ve given presenta-
tions in classes for years. I can get
through this because I’ve rehearsed
and I’m prepared.
Focus on Your Message, Not Your Fear
The more you think about being anxious about speaking, the more you will in-
crease your level of anxiety. Instead, think about what you are going to say. In
the few minutes before you address your listeners, mentally review your major
ideas, your introduction, and your conclusion. Focus on your ideas rather than
on your fear.
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 24 11/4/14 12:41 PM
25
Build Your Confidence 2.2
Look for Positive Support
Evidence suggests that if you think you see audience members looking critical
of you or your message, you may feel more apprehensive and nervous when
you speak.39 Stated more positively, when you are aware of positive audience
support, you will feel more confident and less nervous. To reiterate our previous
advice: It is important to be audience-centered. Although you may face some au-
diences who won’t respond positively to you or your message, the overwhelm-
ing majority of listeners will be positive. Read the How To box to learn how you
and your public-speaking classmates can support one another.
Focus on Your Accomplishment, Not Your Fear
When you finish your speech, tell yourself something positive to celebrate your
accomplishment. Say to yourself, “I did it! I spoke, and people listened.” Don’t
replay your mental image of yourself as nervous and fearful. Instead, mentally
replay your success in communicating with your listeners. There is evidence
that as you continue to gain experience presenting speeches you will gain confi-
dence and have a greater willingness to communicate. So when you finish your
speech, congratulate yourself on having achieved your goal, knowing that your
success is likely to result in more success in the future.42
Seek Speaking Opportunities
The more experience you gain as a public speaker, the less nervous you will
feel.43 This course in public speaking will give you opportunities to enhance
Get and Give Support in Public-Speaking Class
One study found that speakers experienced less apprehension if they had a support group or a
small “learning community” that provided positive feedback and reinforcement.40 This finding has
implications for you as a speaker and listener.
	1.	
Join a study group.  When you have a speaking assignment, work with others to provide
support both as you prepare and when you present your speech.
	2.	
Listen supportively.  When you’re listening to speakers in your communication class, help
them by providing eye contact and positive nonverbal support, such as nodding in agree-
ment and maintaining a positive, sincere facial expression.
	3.	
Empathize with other students’ anxieties.  Providing positive supportive feedback is es-
pecially important when you know that a speaker is quite nervous. Try to understand what
might make your classmates anxious. For example, one study found that nonnative speak-
ers may feel anxious and nervous because English is not their native language.41
You can help your fellow students feel more comfortable as speakers, and they can do the same
for you. Watch for their support.
HOW
TO
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 25 11/4/14 12:41 PM
26 Speaking with Confidence
2.2
both your confidence and your skill through frequent practice. Researchers have
found that speakers who were the most nervous at the beginning of a public-
speaking class experienced the greatest decreases in nervousness by the end of
the class.44 Another research study found that students who took a basic public-
speaking course reported having less apprehension and more satisfaction about
speaking than did students who had not taken such a course.45 To add to the
practice you will get in this class, consider joining clubs and organizations such
as Toastmasters, an organization dedicated to improving public-speaking skills
by providing a supportive group of people to help you polish your speaking
and overcome your anxiety. As you develop a track record of successfully deliv-
ering speeches, you will find that you have more confidence.46
Quick Check
Build Your Confidence
•	 Be audience-centered.
•	 View the public-speaking event positively.
•	 Prepare your speech early, and be well organized.
•	 Select an appropriate topic, and focus on your message, not on your fear.
•	 Rehearse out loud, and know your introduction and conclusion.
•	 Visualize your success, and give yourself a mental pep talk.
•	 Channel your nervous energy, and use deep-breathing techniques.
•	 Look for positive listener support.
•	 Accept lots of speaking opportunities.
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 26 11/4/14 12:41 PM
27
Chapter 2 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
2.1	 Explain the reasons for and processes involved in nervousness about
public speaking.
Genetic traits, as well as several specific reasons, can cause anxiety. Some
­
beginning public speakers feel nervous at even the thought of giving a speech.
Speakers can also experience different patterns of anxiety. Physical symptoms,
such as a racing heart, are signs your body is trying to support you. Remember
that almost every speaker experiences some nervousness and that some anxiety
can be useful.
2.2	 Describe effective strategies for building public-speaking confidence.
Specific suggestions to help you manage your apprehension include being pre-
pared and knowing your audience, imagining the speech environment when
you rehearse, and using relaxation techniques, deep breathing, and focusing
thoughts away from your fear. Experiencing and celebrating your successes as a
speaker can also help build confidence.
Think about These Questions
•	 Should a speaker reveal to the audience that he or she is nervous?
•	 Mike Roberts, president of his fraternity, is nervous about presenting his
first report to the university academic council. What advice would you give
to help him manage his nervousness?
M02_BEEB3981_05_SE_C02_015-028.indd 27 11/4/14 12:41 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
29
Chapter 3
Presenting Your
First Speech
“If all my talents
and powers were
to be taken from
me by some
inscrutable
Providence, and I
had my choice of
keeping but one,
I would unhesitat-
ingly ask to be al-
lowed to keep the
Power of Speak-
ing, for through
it, I would
quickly recover
all the rest.”
—Daniel Webster
	3.1	Consider Your Audience
Gather and Analyze Information
about Your Audience
Consider the Culturally Diverse
Backgrounds of Your Audience
	3.2	Select and Narrow Your Topic
	3.3	Determine Your Purpose
Determine Your General Purpose
Determine Your Specific Purpose
	3.4	Develop Your Central Idea
	3.5	Generate the Main Ideas
	3.6	Gather Supporting Material
Gather Interesting Supporting
Material
Gather Visual Supporting Material
	3.7	Organize Your Speech
Divide Your Speech
Outline
(continued)
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 29 11/4/14 1:00 PM
30 Presenting Your First Speech
﻿3
Outline Your Speech
Consider Presentation Aids
	3.8	Rehearse Your Speech
Rehearse Your Speech Aloud
Practice Making Eye Contact
Make Decisions about the Style of
Your Speech
	3.9	Deliver Your Speech
Learning Objectives
	3.1	Explain why it is important to be audience-centered during each
step of the speechmaking process.
	3.2	Select and narrow an appropriate topic for a speech.
	3.3	Differentiate between a general speech purpose and a specific
speech purpose.
	3.4	Develop a sentence that captures the central idea of a speech.
	3.5	Identify three strategies for generating the main ideas for a
speech.
	3.6	Describe several types of supporting material that could be used
to support speech ideas.
	3.7	Develop a speech with three main organizational parts—an
introduction, a body, and a conclusion.
	3.8	Identify successful strategies for rehearsing a speech.
	3.9	Describe the essential elements of effective speech delivery.
As you think about preparing your first speech, you might wonder, “What do I
do first?” Your assignment might be to introduce yourself. Or your first assign-
ment might be a brief informative talk—to describe something to your audience.
Regardless of the specific assignment, you need some idea of how to begin. You
don’t need to read this book cover to cover before you give your first speech. But
it is useful to have an overview of the various steps and skills involved in giving
a speech. Figure 3.1 presents a diagram of the tasks involved in the speechmak-
ing process, emphasizing the audience as the central concern at every step of the
process.
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 30 11/4/14 1:00 PM
31
Consider Your Audience 3.1
Consider Your Audience
3.1	 Explain why it is important to be audience-centered during each step of
the speechmaking process.
Why should the central focus of public speaking be the audience rather than,
perhaps, topic selection or research? The simple truth is that your audience in-
fluences the topic you choose and every later step of the speechmaking process.
In a very real sense, your audience “writes” the speech.1
Think of this first step of speechmaking less as a “step”—something you
do once and go on to the next step—and more as the beginning of a continuous
process. Whether pondering what to speak about or delivering your conclud-
ing remarks, we suggest that you never stop thinking about the reason you are
speaking—to communicate with your audience.
3.1
Figure 3.1 This model of the speechmaking process emphasizes
the importance of considering your audience as you work on each
task involved in designing and presenting a speech.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 31 11/4/14 1:00 PM
32 Presenting Your First Speech
3.2
Gather and Analyze Information about
Your Audience
To be audience-centered, you need to first identify and then analyze informa-
tion about your listeners. You will be able to determine some basic information
just by looking at members of your speech class, such as approximately how old
they are and the percentages of men and women. You also know that they are
all students in a public-speaking class. To determine other, less obvious informa-
tion, you might need to ask them questions or design a short questionnaire.
Being audience-centered involves making decisions about the content and
delivery of your speech before you speak, based on knowledge of your audience’s
values, beliefs, and knowledge. It also means being aware of your audience’s re-
sponses during the speech so that you can make appropriate adjustments.
Consider the Culturally Diverse Backgrounds
of Your Audience
You need not give speeches in foreign countries to recognize the importance of
adapting to different cultural expectations of individual audience members. Peo-
ple in the United States are highly diverse in culture, age, ethnicity, and religious
tradition. Consider the various cultural backgrounds of your classmates. Sev-
eral years ago, the typical college student was likely to be a recent high school
graduate between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one. Today, your classmates
probably reflect a much wider range of ages, backgrounds, and experiences. Dif-
ferent cultures have radically different expectations about public speaking. You
will want to adjust not only your delivery style but also your topic, pattern of
organization, and the examples you use, according to who your audience mem-
bers are and what topics they are interested in.
Being sensitive to your audience and adapting your message accordingly
will serve you well, not only when you are addressing listeners with different
cultural backgrounds from your own but in all types of situations. If you learn
to analyze your audience and adapt to their expectations, you can apply these
skills in numerous settings: at a job interview, during a business presentation or
city council election campaign—even while proposing marriage.
Select and Narrow Your Topic
3.2	 Select and narrow an appropriate topic for a speech.
While keeping your audience foremost in mind, your next task is to determine
what you will talk about and to limit your topic to fit the constraints of your
speaking assignment. Pay special attention to the guidelines your instructor
gives you for your assignment.
3.2
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 32 11/4/14 1:00 PM
33
Determine Your Purpose 3.3
If your first speech assignment is to introduce yourself, your speech topic
has been selected for you: You are the topic. It is not uncommon to be asked to
speak on a specific subject. Often, though, the task of selecting and narrowing a
topic will be yours. Choosing or finding a topic on which to speak can be frus-
trating. “What should I talk about?” can become a haunting question. The three
questions in the How To box can help you to pick a topic. For more help, study
Chapter 7, in which we discuss topic selection in more detail.
It’s a good idea to give yourself plenty of time to select and narrow your
topic. Don’t wait until the last minute to ponder what you might talk about.
One of the most important things you can do to be an effective speaker is to
start preparing your speech well in advance of your speaking date. One re-
search study identified some very practical advice: The amount of time you
spend preparing for your speech is one of the best predictors of a good grade
on your speech.2
Determine Your Purpose
3.3	 Differentiate between a general speech purpose and a specific speech
purpose.
You might think that once you have your topic, you are ready to start the re-
search process. Before you do that, however, you need to decide on both a gen-
eral purpose and a specific purpose.
3.3
Pick a Speech Topic
Although there is no single answer to the question of what you should talk about, you can discover
a topic by asking yourself three standard questions:
	1.	
Who is the audience?  Your topic may grow from basic knowledge about your audience.
For example, if you know that your audience members are primarily between the ages of 25
and 40, you might try to select a topic of interest to people who are probably working and
either seeking partners or raising families.
	2.	
What are my interests, talents, and experiences?  Your choice of major in college,
your job, your hobbies, and your ancestry are sources for topic ideas. Issues about which
you feel strongly or want to learn can also sometimes make good speech topics.
	3.	
What is the occasion?  The occasion for which the audience has gathered may suggest
some topics to you or may prohibit you from discussing certain topics. A speech to your
class, for example, probably calls for a different topic than does a speech to a religious
group, a model railroad club, or a city council meeting. Consider the physical setting of your
speech as well as any time limits, too.
HOW
TO
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 33 11/4/14 1:00 PM
34 Presenting Your First Speech
3.3
Determine Your General Purpose
Your general purpose is the overarching goal of your speech. There are three
general purposes for speeches: to inform, to persuade, and to entertain.
•	 Speaking to inform. When you inform, you teach, define, illustrate, clarify, or
elaborate on a topic. The primary objective of class lectures, seminars, and
workshops is to inform. Chapter 15 will show you how to construct an effec-
tive speech with an informative purpose.
•	 Speaking to persuade. A speech to persuade seeks to change or reinforce lis-
teners’ attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior. Ads on TV, the radio, and the
Internet; sermons; political speeches; and sales presentations are examples
of speeches designed to persuade. To be a skilled persuader, you need to be
sensitive to your audience’s attitudes toward you and your topic. In Chap-
ters 16 and 17, we will discuss principles and strategies for preparing per-
suasive speeches.
•	 Speaking to entertain. To entertain listeners is the third general purpose of a
speech. After-dinner speeches and comic monologues are mainly intended
as entertainment. As we describe in Chapter 18, the key to an effective en-
tertaining speech often lies in your choice of stories, examples, and illustra-
tions as well as in your delivery.
Determine Your Specific Purpose
Your specific purpose is a concise statement indicating what you want your
listeners to be able to do, remember, or feel when you have finished your
speech. A specific purpose statement identifies the audience response you
desire. You can use the instructions in the How To box to develop a specific-­
purpose statement.
Develop and Use a Specific Purpose
•	 Always consider your audience. Your specific purpose should be a fine-tuned statement of
behavior you want your listeners to show rather than a statement of what you will do.
•	 Start with the phrase By the end of my speech the audience will [be able to]. . . .
•	 Add your goal. State the response you desire, in precise, measurable terms.
•	 Write down the entire specific purpose, and keep it before you as you gather ideas for your
talk.
•	 Use your specific purpose to guide your research and help you choose supporting materials.
•	 Modify your purpose, if necessary, while you prepare your speech. But be sure to keep a clear
objective in mind at all times as you move through the preparation stage, so that you stay on
track.
HOW
TO
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 34 11/4/14 1:00 PM
35
Generate the Main Ideas 3.5
Your specific purpose adds detail to your general purpose:
•	 For an informative speech, you may simply want your audience to restate an
idea, define new words, or identify, describe, or illustrate something. For
example, “At the end of my speech, the class will be able to identify three
counseling facilities on campus and describe the best way to get help at each
one.”
•	 For a persuasive speech, you may try to rouse your listeners to take a class,
buy something, or vote for someone. “At the end of my speech, the audi-
ence will visit the counseling facilities on campus.”
•	 For a speech meant to entertain, you may want your audience to feel some
positive emotions. “At the end of my speech, the audience will be amused
by the series of misunderstandings I created when I began making inquiries
about career advisors on campus.”
Develop Your Central Idea
3.4	 Develop a sentence that captures the central idea of a speech.
You should now be able to write the central idea of your speech. Whereas your
statement of a specific purpose indicates what you want your audience to do
when you have finished your speech, your central idea identifies the essence of
your message. Think of it as a one-sentence summary of your speech. If you met
someone in the elevator after your speech and this person asked you to sum-
marize the speech as you traveled between floors, you would be stating your
central idea. Here is an example:
Topic:	 The Wheat Belly Diet
General Purpose:	 To inform
Specific Purpose:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to identify the three key elements in the Wheat Belly
Diet.
Central Idea:	
The Wheat Belly Diet is based on reducing the amount
of processed foods you eat, avoiding all processed
flour, and increasing the amount of exercise you get.
Generate the Main Ideas
3.5	 Identify three strategies for generating the main ideas for a speech.
Once you have an appropriate topic, a specific purpose, and a well-worded cen-
tral idea down on paper, the next task is to identify your main ideas. These are
the major divisions of your speech, the key points that you wish to develop.
Your goal is to develop or discover ideas that result in new insights or new
3.4
3.5
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 35 11/4/14 1:00 PM
36 Presenting Your First Speech
3.6
approaches to an old problem, an ability the ancient Romans called invention.
The How To box shows how you can use your single central idea to generate
multiple main ideas for your speech.
Your time limit, your topic, and the information gleaned from your research
will determine how many major ideas will be in your speech. A three- to five-
minute speech might have only two major ideas.
Gather Supporting Material
3.6	 Describe several types of supporting material that could be used to
support speech ideas.
With your main idea or ideas in mind, your next job is to gather material to support
them: facts, examples, definitions, and quotations from other people that illustrate,
amplify, clarify, and provide evidence. Here, as always in preparing your speech,
the importance of being an audience-centered speaker cannot be overemphasized.
Gather Interesting Supporting Material
If a speech is boring, it is usually because the speaker has not chosen supporting
material that is relevant or interesting to the audience. Don’t just give people
data; connect facts to their lives. As one sage quipped, “Data is not information
3.6
Identify the Main Ideas in Your Speech
To determine how to subdivide your central idea into key points, ask yourself these three questions:
	1.	
Does the central idea have logical divisions?  If the central idea is “There are three
ways to interpret the stock-market page of your local news source,” your speech could
be organized into three parts, one about each method of interpreting the stock news. A
speech about the art of applying theatrical makeup could also be organized into three
parts: eye makeup, face makeup, and hair coloring. Looking for logical divisions in your
speech topic may be the simplest way to determine key points.
	2.	
Can you think of several reasons why the central idea is true?  If you are trying to
prove a point and you have three reasons to show that your point is true, you could orga-
nize your speech around those three reasons. If you have reasons that explain that your
central idea is true, you are probably presenting a persuasive speech. If your central idea
is “New legislation is needed to ensure that U.S. citizens’ privacy is protected,” each major
point of your speech could be a reason you think we need new privacy laws.
	3.	
Can you support the central idea with a series of steps?  Speeches describing a per-
sonal experience or explaining how to build or make something can usually be organized in
a step-by-step progression. Suppose your central idea is “Running for a campus office is
easy to do.” Your speech could be developed around a series of steps telling your listeners
what to do first, second, and third to get elected.
HOW
TO
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 36 11/4/14 1:00 PM
37
Gather Supporting Material 3.6
any more than 50 tons of cement is a skyscraper.”3 Supporting material should
be personal and concrete, and it should appeal to your listeners’ senses.
•	 Personal. Support your ideas with stories based on your own experiences.
As Don Hewitt, one of the creators of the television show 60 Minutes
revealed, one secret to his success as a communicator has been telling stories.4
Everyone likes a good story.
•	 Concrete. Relating abstract statistics to something tangible can help to com-
municate your ideas more clearly. You could give your listeners an idea that
snack food is a big business by saying that Frito-Lay sells 2.6 billion pounds
of snack food each year, but you make your point truly memorable by adding
that 2.6 billion pounds is triple the weight of the Empire State Building.5 Or
to make a point about teenagers and safe driving, you could point out that
the number of teens killed in car accidents in the United States each year is
the same as if 12 fully loaded jumbo jets crashed each year.6
•	 Appealing to the senses. Provide vivid descriptions of things that are tangi-
ble so that your audience can visualize what you are talking about. Besides
sight, supporting material can appeal to touch, hearing, smell, and taste.
The more senses you trigger with words, the more interesting your talk will
be. A description such as “the rough, splintery surface of weather-beaten
wood” or “the sweet, cool, refreshing flavor of cherry Jell-O” evokes a sen-
sory image.
How does a public speaker find interesting and relevant supporting mate-
rial? By developing good research skills. President Woodrow Wilson once ad-
mitted, “I use not only all the brains I have, but all that I can borrow.” Although
it is important to have good ideas, it is equally important to know how to build
on existing knowledge.
In addition to becoming a skilled user of electronic and library resources,
you will also learn to be on the lookout as you read, surf the Internet, watch
TV, and listen to the radio for ideas, examples, illustrations, and quotations that
could be used in a speech. Finally, you will learn how to gather information
through interviews and written requests for information on various topics.
Gather Visual Supporting Material
For many people, seeing is believing. Besides searching for verbal forms of sup-
porting material, you can seek visual supporting material. Almost any presenta-
tion can be enhanced by reinforcing key ideas with visual aids. Today there are
many technologies, such as PowerPointTM, PreziTM, and KeynoteTM, for display-
ing visual aids. Often, however, the most effective visual aids are the simplest:
an object, a chart, a graph, a poster, a model, a map, or a person—perhaps you—
to demonstrate a process or skill.
In Chapter 14, we offer some basic advice about using presentation aids:
Make your visual images large enough to be seen, and allow plenty of time to
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 37 11/4/14 1:00 PM
38 Presenting Your First Speech
3.7
prepare them; look at your audience, not your presentation aid; control your
audience’s attention by timing your visual displays; and keep your presentation
aids simple. Always concentrate on communicating effectively with your audi-
ence, not on dazzling your listeners with glitzy presentation displays.
Organize Your Speech
3.7	 Develop a speech with three main organizational parts—an
introduction, a body, and a conclusion.
A wise person once said, “If effort is organized, accomplishment follows.” Clas-
sical rhetoricians called the process of developing an orderly speech disposition.
A clearly and logically structured speech helps your audience to understand and
remember what you say. A logical structure also helps you to feel more in con-
trol of your speech, and greater control helps you to feel more comfortable while
delivering your message.
Divide Your Speech
Every well-prepared speech has three major divisions:
•	 The introduction helps to capture attention, serves as an overview of the
speech, and provides your audience with reasons to listen to you.
•	 The body presents the main content of your speech.
•	 The conclusion summarizes your key ideas.
You might have heard this advice on how to organize a speech: “Tell them
what you’re going to tell them (the introduction), tell them (the body of the
speech), and tell them what you told them (the conclusion).”
Because your introduction previews your speech and your conclusion sum-
marizes it, most public-speaking teachers recommend that you prepare your intro-
duction and conclusion after you have carefully organized the body of your talk.
As a student of public speaking, you will study and learn to apply varia-
tions of this basic pattern of organization (chronological, topical, cause–effect,
problem–solution) that will help your audience to understand your meaning.
You will learn about previewing and summarizing—methods that will help
your audience to retain your main ideas.
Outline Your Speech
If you have already generated your major ideas on the basis of logical divisions,
reasons, or steps, you are well on your way to developing an outline. For your
first speech, you might want to adapt the simple outline format shown in the
Sample Outline in this chapter.7 Indicate your major ideas by Roman numerals.
Use capital letters for your supporting points. Use Arabic numerals if you need
to subdivide your ideas further.
3.7
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 38 11/4/14 1:00 PM
39
Organize Your Speech 3.7
Topic:
How to invest money
Sample Outline
Your instructor may assign a
topic, or you may select it.
To inform, persuade, or entertain.
Your instructor will probably
specify your general purpose.
A clear statement indicating
what your audience should be
able to do after hearing your
speech.
General Purpose:
To inform
Specific Purpose:
At the end of my speech, the audience should be able to identify two
principles that will help them to better invest their money.
A one-sentence summary of
your talk.
Central Idea:
Knowing the source of money, how to invest it, and how money grows
can lead to increased income from wise investments.
Attention-catching opening
lines.
Introduction:
Imagine for a moment that it is the year 2065. You are 65 years old.
You’ve just picked up your mail and opened an envelope that contains a
check for $100,000! No, you didn’t win the lottery. You smile as you realize
your own modest investment strategy over the last 50 years has paid off
handsomely.
	II.	 Major idea
		A. Supporting idea
		B. Supporting idea
		C. Supporting idea
Preview major ideas.
	 II.	 You can do three things with a dollar.
		 A.	 You can spend your money.
		 B.	 You can lend your money to others.
		 C.	 You can invest your money.
Today I’d like to answer three questions that can help you become
a better money manager: First, where does money come from? Second,
where do you invest it? And third, how does a little money grow into a lot
of money?
	III.	 Major idea
		A. Supporting idea
		B. Supporting idea
Tell the audience why they
should listen to you.
	 III.	 Two principles can help make you rich.
		 A.	
The “magic” of compound interest can transform pennies into
millions.
		 B.	
Finding the best rate of return on your money can pay big
­dividends.
Knowing the answers to these three questions can literally pay big
dividends for you. With only modest investments and a well-disciplined
attitude, you could easily have an annual income of $100,000 or more.
	 I.	 Major idea
		A. Supporting idea
		B. Supporting idea
Body:
	 I.	 There are two sources of money.
		 A.	 You already have some money.
		 B.	 You will earn money in the future.
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 39 11/4/14 1:00 PM
40 Presenting Your First Speech
3.7
Some public-speaking teachers may require a slightly different outline for-
mat. For example, your teacher might want you to outline your speech using
Roman numeral I for the introduction, II for the body, and III for your conclu-
sion. Or your instructor might want you to add more detailed information about
your supporting material in outlines that you submit in class. Make sure you
follow the precise guidelines your instructor provides for outlining your speech.
Unless required, however, do not write your speech word for word. If you do,
you will sound stilted and unnatural.
Consider Presentation Aids
In addition to developing a written outline to use as you speak, consider using
presentation aids to help your audience understand the structure of your speech
and to clarify your major ideas. For example, you could use the three visuals
shown in Figure 3.2 to help your audience understand the three major ideas in
the outline just presented.
For all the steps we have discussed so far, your success as a speaker will
ultimately be determined by your audience. That is why, throughout the text,
we refer you to the audience-centered speechmaking model presented earlier in
this chapter.
Conclusion:
Today I’ve identified three key aspects of effective money management:
(1) knowing sources of money, (2) knowing what you can do with money,
and (3) understanding money-management principles that can make you
rich. Now, let’s go “back to the future”! Remember the good feeling you
had when you received your check for $100,000? Recall that feeling again
when you are depositing your first paycheck. Remember this simple secret
for accumulating wealth: Part of all I earn is money to keep. It is within
your power to “go for the gold.”
Summarize main ideas and
restate central idea.
Figure 3.2  Presentation Graphics for the Major Ideas in Your Speech
Sources: Figure: Shannon Kingston.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education,
Upper Saddle River, NJ. Photo:
acekreations/Fotolia
Sources: Figure: Shannon Kingston.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education,
Upper Saddle River, NJ. Photo: Edyta
Pawlowska/Fotolia
Sources: Figure: Shannon Kingston.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education,
Upper Saddle River, NJ. Photo:
selensergen/Fotolia
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 40 11/4/14 1:00 PM
41
Rehearse Your Speech 3.8
Once you are comfortable with the structure of your talk and you have de-
veloped your visual aids, you are ready to rehearse.
Rehearse Your Speech
3.8	 Identify successful strategies for rehearsing a speech.
Remember this joke? On a street in New York, one man asks another, “How do
I get to Carnegie Hall?” The answer: “Practice, practice, practice.” The joke may
be older than Carnegie Hall itself, but it is still good advice to all beginners, in-
cluding novice speakers. A speech is a performance. As with any stage perfor-
mance, you need to rehearse. Experienced carpenters know to “measure twice,
cut once.” Rehearsing your speech is a way to “measure” your message so that
you get it right when you present it to your audience.
Rehearse Your Speech Aloud
The best way to practice is aloud, standing just as you will when you deliver
your speech to your audience. If you practice your speech as if you were actu-
ally delivering it, you will be a more effective speaker when you talk to the
audience. And there is evidence that, like preparing early for your speech,
spending time rehearsing your delivery will enhance the overall quality of
your speech.8
As you rehearse out loud, try to find a comfortable way to phrase your
ideas, but don’t try to memorize your talk. In fact, if you have rehearsed your
speech so many times that you are using exactly the same words every time, you
have rehearsed long enough. Rehearse just enough so that you can discuss your
ideas and supporting material without leaving out major parts of your speech.
It is all right to use notes, but most public-speaking instructors limit the number
of notes you may use.
Practice Making Eye Contact
As you rehearse, practice making eye contact with your imaginary audience as
often as you can. Also, be certain to speak loudly enough for all in the room to
hear. If you are not sure what to do with your hands when you rehearse, just
keep them at your sides. Focus on your message rather than worrying about
how to gesture. Avoid jingling change with your hand in your pocket or using
other gestures that could distract your audience.
If you are delivering your speech via video (whether live or prerecorded),
remember that the camera may make it appear to listeners that you are only a
few feet away from them. For video, you need not use overly animated gestures
or facial expressions. A natural, conversational quality will be valued whether
you are speaking in front of a camera or speaking to a live audience.
3.8
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 41 11/4/14 1:00 PM
42 Presenting Your First Speech
3.9
Make Decisions about the Style of Your Speech
Besides rehearsing your physical delivery, you also will decide about the style
of your speech, the words that you use and your arrangement of those words.
As we have said, some audiences respond to a style that is simple and informal.
Others prefer a grand and highly poetic style. To be a good speaker, you must
become familiar with the language your listeners are used to hearing and must
know how to select the right word or phrase to communicate an idea. Work to
develop an ear for how words will sound to your audience.
Deliver Your Speech
3.9	 Describe the essential elements of effective speech delivery.
Delivery is the final step in the preparation process. Before you walk to the front
of the room, look at your listeners to see whether the audience that has assem-
bled is what you were expecting. Are the people out there of the age, race, and
gender that you had predicted? Or do you need to make last-minute changes in
your message to adjust to a different mix of audience members?
When you are introduced, walk calmly and confidently to the front of the
room, establish eye contact with your audience, smile naturally, and deliver
your attention-catching opening sentence. Concentrate on your message and
your audience. Deliver your speech in a conversational style, and try to estab-
lish rapport with your listeners. Deliver your speech just as you rehearsed it be-
fore your imaginary audience: Maintain eye contact, speak loudly enough to be
heard, and use some natural variations in pitch. Finally, remember the advice of
columnist Ann Landers: “Be sincere, be brief, and be seated.”
Table 3.1 summarizes this chapter’s introduction to the audience-centered
speaking process and refers you to later chapters for in-depth information about
each step. For a model of many attributes of a well-crafted message that we have
discussed, read the Sample Speech by student Grace Hildenbrand.9
3.9
Table 3.1  An Overview of the Public-Speaking Process
Public-Speaking Step What to Do For More Information
1. Consider the Audience •	 Gather information about your audience.
•	 Analyze the information to help you make choices
about every aspect of preparing and presenting
your speech.
Chapter 6: Analyzing Your Audience
2. 
Select and Narrow Your
Topic
To select a good speech topic, consider
•	 Your audience
•	 Your own interests
•	 The specific occasion when you will be speaking
Chapter 7: Developing Your Speech
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 42 11/4/14 1:00 PM
43
Deliver Your Speech 3.9
3. Determine Your Purpose •	 Determine whether your general purpose is to
inform, to persuade, or to entertain.
•	 Decide on your specific purpose—what you want
your audience to be able to do when you finish
your speech.
Chapter 7: Developing Your Speech
Chapter 15: Speaking to Inform
Chapter 16: Understanding Principles of
Persuasive Speaking
Chapter 17: Using Persuasive Strategies
Chapter 18: Speaking for Special
­
Occasions and Purposes
4. Develop Your Central Idea Develop a one-sentence summary of your speech. Chapter 7: Developing Your Speech
5. Generate Your Main Ideas Identify your major ideas by determining whether your
central idea has logical divisions, reasons why it is
true, or steps.
Chapter 7: Developing Your Speech
6. 
Gather Supporting
Material
Conduct research to identify useful and interesting
stories, descriptions, definitions, statistics, analogies,
and opinions that support your major ideas.
Chapter 8: Gathering and Using
Supporting Material
7. Organize Your Speech •	 Develop your introduction, body, and conclusion.
•	 Use signposts and transitions to clarify your
organization.
Chapter 9: Organizing and Outlining Your
Speech
Chapter 10: Introducing Your Speech
Chapter 11: Concluding Your Speech
8. Rehearse Your Speech •	 Prepare your speaking notes, and practice using
them well in advance of your speaking date.
•	 Practice your speech out loud, standing as you
would stand while delivering your speech.
•	 Develop appropriate and useful presentation aids.
Chapter 12: Using Words Well
Chapter 13: Delivering Your Speech
Chapter 14: Designing and Using
Presentation Aids
9. Deliver Your Speech •	 Adjust your message to the audience if necessary.
•	 Maintain good eye contact.
•	 Use appropriate gestures and posture.
•	 Use appropriate vocal volume and variation.
Chapter 13: Delivering Your Speech
Cinderella
by Grace Hildenbrand
Sample Speech
The speaker has analyzed her
audience and knows that most
of them are from the United
States.
This speaker’s general purpose
is to inform the audience about
the two most well-known
versions of the Cinderella story.
After giving a verbal signal to
mark the transition to the body
of her speech, the speaker
states her central idea.
There are thought to be over five hundred different versions of Cinderella,
making it one of the most popular fairy tales in the world. In the United
States, most children have seen Disney’s Cinderella and adults are either
familiar with this movie or they know other versions of the Cinderella fairy
tale. I know that I watched Disney’s version of Cinderella many times as a
kid. And then when I got to college, I took a German class and I learned
about the Brothers Grimm version of Cinderella. I was surprised to find
that it was actually quite different from Disney’s version of Cinderella. In
the Brothers Grimm there are two brothers, Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm,
who compiled different fairy tales into books back in the 1800s and one of
these fairy tales was Cinderella. Disney did change aspects of the Brothers
Grimm version of Cinderella to make it more appropriate for children. The
differences in these two versions are revealed in the characters, in the
royal ball scene, and in the use of violence.
(continued)
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 43 11/4/14 1:00 PM
44 Presenting Your First Speech
3.9
This story helps keep the
audience interested and
supports the speaker’s central
idea.
So to begin, I would like to discuss the differences in characters
between the Disney and Brothers Grimm versions of Cinderella. Disney
both added in and changed characters from the Brothers Grimm version
of Cinderella. For example, the fairy godmother character did not exist
in the Brothers Grimm version of Cinderella. It was actually a tree that
Cinderella would go to for help and there were birds that lived in the tree
that would help her out with whatever she needed. So, for example, when
Cinderella was getting ready to go to the ball, she needed to make sure
that she finished up her chores and she had a dress to wear. And so the
birds that lived in the trees whenever she asked for help would help her
finish her chores and also they gave her a dress to wear to the ball.
Another change that Disney made was to add in the other animal
characters to Cinderella. So in the Brothers Grimm version, there are
the birds that serve as the fairy godmother’s role, but the Disney version
not only had birds, but also they added in a dog, a cat, and a horse as
well as mice to make it more appealing for kids. Neeley Tucker from the
Washington Post discusses that most fairy tales were not originally for
children but they were mostly written for adults. And so most fairy tales
have actually been changed to be more appropriate for kids and this was
definitely the case for Cinderella.
So now that I’ve discussed the differences in characters between the
two versions, I would like to discuss the differences in the royal ball scene. If
you recall from Disney, there’s one royal ball scene where Cinderella meets
her prince, but in the Brothers Grimm version there is a royal festival that
includes three different royal balls in three days. At each royal ball, Cinderella
dances with the prince, then she runs away and hides from him before
the end of the night and she doesn’t lose her slipper until the third night.
According to Sharron McElmeel and her book on children’s literature, there
are a couple of other changes in this scene as well; one of them is that in
the Brothers Grimm version, the shoe was golden and then in Disney, of
course, it was a glass slipper. And then Disney also added the midnight
curfew; so in the Brothers Grimm version, Cinderella did not need to be
back by the stroke of midnight. She was simply trying to get away from the
prince so that he wouldn’t figure out that she was a housemaid. She was
trying to hide her true identity. Also, the prince spreads pitch out along the
steps of the castle on purpose on the third night, so that Cinderella will get
stuck and he will be able to get her shoe and figure out who she is later on.
The summary and preview
help the audience follow the
organization of the speech.
So now that we’ve talked a little bit about the differences in the
characters between the two versions and the differences in the royal
ball scene, I’d like to discuss the way that Disney omitted some violence
from its version of Cinderella compared to the Brothers Grimm version.
The Brothers Grimm version of Cinderella is much gorier than Disney’s
version. For example, when the prince is trying to figure out who Cinderella
is and he’s having all these women trying to try on the slipper, he comes
to Cinderella’s stepsisters and both of them have feet that are too big.
The first stepsister actually cuts off her toe to make the shoe fit, and the
second stepsister actually cuts off her heel to make the shoe fit. So it’s
very bloody and it’s actually kind of funny because the prince doesn’t
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 44 11/4/14 1:00 PM
45
Deliver Your Speech 3.9
The speaker directly addresses
the audience members to
engage their attention and
involve them in the speech.
Another gory aspect of the Brothers Grimm version is that at
Cinderella’s wedding at the end of the story, as punishment for being
wicked, the stepsisters actually get their eyes poked out by the birds and
they are blinded. So with these changes, you can imagine that if Disney
would have kept the fairy tale similar to the Brothers Grimm version, it likely
would have changed the audience. You know, rather than having it geared
toward children, it might be geared toward adults, and it definitely would
have not become such a popular and important part of our childhood.
In her conclusion, the speaker
summarizes the main points of
her speech.
The speaker closes with a
vivid image and a suggestion
for action. Both will help the
audience remember the content
of this speech.
In conclusion, now you should better understand the differences
between the Disney and Brothers Grimm versions of Cinderella and why
Disney changed its version of Cinderella. Specifically, these differences
were that Disney added in and changed some of the characters; Disney
also made changes to the royal ball scene and got rid of some of the
violence from the Brothers Grimm version. So next time that you’re
watching Disney’s Cinderella or any other version of Cinderella, I’d like you
to imagine that if there was blood dripping from the eyes and feet of the
stepsisters how this would change your reaction to this classic fairy tale.
seem to realize that neither one of the stepsisters is Cinderella and,
according to the Greenwood Encyclopedia of Folktales and Fairytales,
the prince doesn’t realize that neither of the stepsisters is Cinderella until
the birds that serve the fairy godmother role tell him, “Hey, there’s blood
everywhere, neither one of these women is Cinderella!”
Here the speaker gives an oral
citation, mentioning the source
of her supporting material.
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 45 11/4/14 1:00 PM
46 Chapter 3  study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
3.1	 Explain why it is important to be audience-centered during each step of
the speechmaking process.
Your audience influences your topic selection and every aspect of presenting a
speech.
3.2	 Select and narrow an appropriate topic for a speech.
Answers to three questions can help you select and narrow your speech topic:
Who is the audience? What are my interests, talents, and experiences? And what
is the occasion?
Key Term
Speech topic
3.3	 Differentiate between a general speech purpose and a specific speech
purpose.
Your general purpose is the overarching goal of your speech (to inform, per-
suade, entertain, or some combination of these purposes). Your specific purpose
is a concise statement of what you want your listeners to be able to do when you
finish your speech.
Key Terms
General purpose
Specific purpose
3.4	 Develop a sentence that captures the central idea of a speech.
A central idea states the essence of your speech in a one-sentence summary.
Key Term
Central idea
3.5	 Identify three strategies for generating the main ideas for a speech.
Virtually any speech can be organized by answering the following three ques-
tions: Does the central idea have logical divisions? What are the reasons the cen-
tral idea is true? Can you support the central idea with a series of steps?
Key Terms
Main ideas
Invention
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 46 11/4/14 1:00 PM
47
Chapter 3  study guide
3.6	 Describe several types of supporting material that could be used to
support speech ideas.
Supporting material consists of the facts, examples, definitions, statistics, analo-
gies, quotations, stories, and visual material that illustrate, amplify, and clarify
your speech. You can find supporting material through the Internet, library re-
sources, other people, or your daily life.
3.7	 Develop a speech with three main organizational parts—an
introduction, a body, and a conclusion.
Your introduction provides an overview of your main points, the body of your
speech presents the key points, and the conclusion summarizes what you have
said.
Key Term
Disposition
3.8	 Identify successful strategies for rehearsing a speech.
Rehearse your speech several times in a way that re-creates the actual speech
presentation experience.
3.9	 Describe the essential elements of effective speech delivery.
The essential aspects of effective delivery include good eye contact with your
listeners, a voice that can be heard by all, and appropriate gestures and posture
that seem natural.
Think about These Questions
•	 Explain how you think your culture influences your expectations of a pub-
lic speaker.
•	 One of your friends took a public-speaking course last year and still has a
file of speech outlines. Because you will give the speech yourself, is it ethi-
cal to use one of your friend’s outlines as a basis for your speech? Explain.
•	 Shara Yobonski is preparing to address the city council in an effort to tell
the members about the Food for Friendship program she has organized in
her neighborhood. What steps should she follow to prepare and deliver an
effective speech?
M03_BEEB3981_05_SE_C03_029-048.indd 47 11/4/14 1:00 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
49
Chapter 4
Speaking Freely
and Ethically
“Free speech
not only lives, it
rocks!”
—Oprah Winfrey
	4.1	Speaking Credibly
	4.2	Speaking Freely
Free Speech and the U.S.
Constitution
Free Speech in the Twentieth
Century
Free Speech in the Twenty-First
Century
	4.3	Speaking Ethically
Have a Clear, Responsible Goal
Use Sound Evidence and
Reasoning
Be Sensitive to and Tolerant of
Differences
Be Honest
Don’t Plagiarize
Outline
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 49 11/5/14 3:18 PM
50 Speaking Freely and Ethically
4.1
Learning Objectives
	4.1	Explain the relationships among ethics, free speech, and credibility.
	4.2	Explain how free speech has been both challenged and defended
throughout U.S. history.
	4.3	List and explain five criteria for ethical public speaking.
In early 2013, Twitter complied with a French court order to block a flood of
anti-Semitic tweets from being seen in France. A few months later, in response to
a boycott against pages containing graphic images of violence against women,
Facebook took down the offending pages and revised its content policies.
Once played out primarily in public gatherings or on radio or television,
the balancing act between ethical speech and free speech has in the twenty-first
century become most visible in social media. Jason Pontin, editor of the MIT
Technology Review, explains the dilemma:
. . . as the technologies created by [social media] have come to touch
nearly everyone who lives, their peculiar understanding of free speech
has collided with different notions of what forms of expression are legal
or proper.1
In our discussion of speaking freely and ethically, we first describe the rela-
tionships among ethics, free speech, and speaker credibility. Then, we will turn
to free speech—both its protection and its restriction by law and public policy.
Finally, we will discuss the ethical practice of free speech by speakers and listen-
ers, providing guidelines to help you balance your right to free speech with your
responsibilities as an audience-centered speaker and as a critical listener.
Speaking Credibly
4.1	 Explain the relationships among ethics, free speech, and credibility.
In the United States and other countries in which free speech is protected by law,
the right to speak freely must be balanced by the responsibility to speak ethically.
Ethics—the beliefs, values, and moral principles by which we determine what
is right or wrong—serve as criteria for many of the decisions we make in our
personal and professional lives and for our judgments of others’ behavior. The
student who refuses to cheat on a test, the employee who will not call in sick to
gain an extra day of vacation, and the property owner who does not claim more
storm damage than she actually suffered have all made choices based on ethics.
We read and hear about ethical issues every day in the media. Cloning,
stem-cell research, and drug testing have engendered heated ethical debates
4.1
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 50 11/5/14 3:18 PM
51
Speaking Freely 4.2
among medical professionals. Advertising by some attorneys has incensed those
who believe that it has resulted in an overall increase in frivolous litigation that
is tarnishing the profession. And in the political arena, debates about reforms of
social programs, fiscal responsibility, and the collection of cell phone data by the
federal government all hinge on ethical issues.
Although you are undoubtedly familiar with many ethical issues, you may
have given less thought to ethics in public speaking. The National Communica-
tion Association’s Credo for Communication Ethics emphasizes the fundamen-
tal nature and far-reaching impact of ethical communication:
Ethical communication is fundamental to responsible thinking, decision
making, and the development of relationships and communities within
and across contexts, cultures, channels, and media. Moreover, ethical
communication enhances human worth and dignity by fostering truth-
fulness, fairness, responsibility, personal integrity, and respect for self
and others.2
Ethical considerations should guide every step of the public-speaking proc­
ess. As you determine the goal of your speech, outline your arguments, and se-
lect your evidence, think about the beliefs, values, and morals of your audience
as well as your own. Ethical public speaking is inherently audience-centered,
always taking into account the needs and rights of the listeners.
Speaking ethically is also central to being perceived by your audience as a
credible speaker. Credibility is a speaker’s believability. A credible speaker is
one whom an audience perceives to be competent, knowledgeable, dynamic,
and trustworthy.
To achieve the last of these four factors—trustworthiness—you as a speaker
must consistently adhere to ethical principles. In fact, the Greek rhetorician Aristotle
used the term ethos—the root word of ethic and ethical—to refer to a speaker’s
credibility. Quintilian, a Roman teacher of public speaking, believed that an ef-
fective public speaker also should be a person of good character, a “good person
speaking well.”
We examine credibility in more detail in Chapter 6, where we discuss ana-
lyzing your audience’s attitudes toward you; in Chapter 10, where we discuss
establishing your credibility in your speech introduction; and in Chapters 16
and 17, where we discuss the role of credibility in persuading an audience.
Speaking Freely
4.2	 Explain how free speech has been both challenged and defended
throughout U.S. history.
In May 2013, a heckler interrupted President Barack Obama three times while he
was delivering a speech at the National Defense University in Washington, D.C.
Obama responded by calmly reminding the woman that the right to free speech
4.2
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 51 11/5/14 3:18 PM
52 Speaking Freely and Ethically
4.2
required not only that he listen to her but also that she listen to him. “You should
let me finish my sentence,” Obama admonished.3 Even during this moment of
confrontation—a moment in which one might question the heckler’s ethics—the
president defended the right of both parties to free speech. For more than
200 years in the United States, entities as varied as state legislatures, colleges
and universities, the American Civil Liberties Union, and the federal courts have
sought to define through both law and public policy the phrase freedom of speech.
Free Speech and the U.S. Constitution
In 1791, the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution was written to guarantee
that “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech.” Only
a few years after the ratification of the First Amendment, however, Congress
passed the Sedition Act, providing punishment for those who spoke out against
the government. The act was allowed to lapse after both Thomas Jefferson and
James Madison declared it unconstitutional.
Free Speech in the Twentieth Century
During World War I, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that it was lawful to restrict
speech that presented “a clear and present danger” to the nation. This decision
led to the founding, in 1920, of the American Civil Liberties Union, the first or-
ganization formed to protect free speech. In 1940, Congress declared it illegal to
urge the violent overthrow of the federal government. However, even as they
heard the hate speech employed by Hitler and the Nazis, U.S. courts and law-
makers argued that only by protecting free speech could the United States pro-
tect the rights of minorities and the disenfranchised. For most of the last half of
the twentieth century, the U.S. Supreme Court continued to protect rather than
to limit free speech, upholding it as “the core aspect of democracy.”4
In 1964, the Supreme Court narrowed the definition of slander, or false
speech that harms someone. The Court ruled that before a public official can
recover damages for slander, he or she must prove that the slanderous statement
was made with “actual malice.”5 Another boost for free speech occurred in 1964,
not in the courts but on a university campus. In December of that year, more
than one thousand students at the University of California in Berkeley took over
three floors of Sproul Hall to protest the recent arrest of outspoken student ac-
tivists. The Berkeley Free Speech Movement that arose from the incident per-
manently changed the political climate of U.S. college campuses. In a written
statement on the 30-year anniversary of the protest, Berkeley’s vice chancellor,
Carol Christ, wrote, “Today it is difficult to imagine life in a university where
there are serious restrictions on the rights of political advocacy.”6
Free speech gained protection in the last two decades of the twentieth cen-
tury, during which the Supreme Court found “virtually all attempts to restrain
speech in advance . . . unconstitutional,” regardless of how hateful or disgusting
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 52 11/5/14 3:18 PM
53
Speaking Freely 4.2
the speech may seem to some.7 In 1989, the Supreme Court defended the burn-
ing of the U.S. flag as a “speech act” protected by the First Amendment. In 1997,
the Court struck down the highly controversial federal Communications De-
cency Act of 1996, which had imposed penalties for creating, transmitting, or
receiving obscene material on the Internet. The Court ruled that “the interest in
encouraging freedom of expression in a democratic society outweighs any theo-
retical but unproven benefit of censorship.”8
Perhaps no twentieth century test of free speech received more publicity than
the sensational 1998 lawsuit brought by four Texas cattlemen against popular
talk-show host Oprah Winfrey. In a 1996 televised show on “mad cow disease,”
Winfrey had declared that she would never eat another hamburger. Charging that
her statement caused cattle prices to plummet, the cattlemen sued for damages;
however, Winfrey’s attorneys successfully argued that the case was an important
test of free speech. Emerging from the courtroom after the verdict in her favor,
Winfrey shouted, “My reaction is that free speech not only lives, it rocks!”9
Free Speech in the Twenty-First Century
One month after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States,
the pendulum again swung toward restriction of free speech with the passage of
the Patriot Act, which broadened the investigative powers of government agen-
cies. The Patriot Act was roundly criticized by various civil rights, free speech,
and publishing groups. One coalition of such groups described the Patriot Act
as “the latest in a long line of abuses of rights in times of conflict.”10 It is ironic
that even as Americans debated the restrictions imposed by the Patriot Act, they
recognized and offered restitution for historical infringement on free speech.
In May 2006, Montana Governor Brian Schweitzer formally pardoned seventy-
eight late citizens of Montana who had been imprisoned or fined under the
Montana Sedition Act of 1918, convictions that “violated basic American rights
of speech. . . .”11
The pendulum swung back in June 2010, when the exercise of free speech cre-
ated controversy for and hastened the retirement of veteran White House correspon-
dent Helen Thomas. Asked by a rabbi to comment on Israel, Thomas responded
that the Israelis should get out of Palestine. Although Thomas later both apologized
and resigned from the White House press corps, her right to free speech was upheld
by former CBS News foreign correspondent Terry Phillips, who noted wryly, “Ap-
parently, journalists are now only willing to defend free speech when it is safe.”12
In the twenty-first century, free speech has increasingly become an issue of
global concern. In 2012, with the support of Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales
and Nobel Peace Price winner Shirin Ebadi, an international team from Oxford
University launched an international, multilingual Web site for the discussion
of free speech. The site, FreeSpeechDebate.com, offers and invites discussion and
debate about ten draft principles for global free speech, which you can read in
Figure 4.1.
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 53 11/5/14 3:18 PM
54 Speaking Freely and Ethically
4.2
Figure 4.1 Ten Draft Principles for Global Free Speech
The Quick Check reviews the history of the First Amendment. There can be
little doubt that in the months and years to come, the United States will continue
to debate “the balance among national security, free speech, and patriotism.”13
Quick Check
History of Free Speech in the United States
1791	 First Amendment guarantees that “Congress shall make no law . . . abridging
the freedom of speech.”
1798	 Sedition Act is passed (expired in 1801).
1919	 U.S. Supreme Court rules that speech presenting “a clear and present
danger” may be restricted.
1920	American Civil Liberties Union is formed.
1940	Congress declares it illegal to urge the violent overthrow of the federal
government.
1964	 U.S. Supreme Court restricts definition of slander; Berkeley Free Speech
Movement is born.
1989	 U.S. Supreme Court defends the burning of the U.S. flag as a “speech act.”
1997	 U.S. Supreme Court strikes down Communications Decency Act of 1996, in
defense of free speech on the Internet.
1998	 Oprah Winfrey successfully defends her right to speak freely on television.
2001	 September 11 terrorist attacks spark passage of the Patriot Act and new
debate over the balance between national security and free speech.
Published on Free Speech Debate (www.freespeechdebate.com). These principles were drafted as part of an Oxford University research
project led by Timothy Garton Ash and published on Free Speech Debate www.freespeechdebate.com where they can also be debated
online.
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 54 11/5/14 3:18 PM
55
Speaking Ethically 4.3
Speaking Ethically
4.3	 List and explain five criteria for ethical public speaking.
As the boundaries of free speech expand, the importance of ethical speech in-
creases. Although there is no definitive ethical creed for a public speaker, teachers
and practitioners of public speaking generally agree that an ethical speaker is one
who has a clear, responsible goal; uses sound evidence and reasoning; is sensitive
to and tolerant of differences; is honest; and avoids plagiarism. In the discussion
that follows, we offer suggestions for observing these ethical guidelines.
Have a Clear, Responsible Goal
The goal of a public speech should be clear to the audience. For example, if you
are trying to convince the audience that your beliefs on gay marriage are more
correct than those of others, you should say so at some point in your speech. If
you keep your true agenda hidden, you violate your listeners’ rights.
In addition, an ethical goal should be socially responsible. A socially re-
sponsible goal is one that gives the listener choices, whereas an irresponsible,
­
unethical goal is demeaning and/or psychologically coercive or oppressive.
­
Adolf Hitler’s speeches, which incited the German people to hatred and geno-
cide, were coercive, as were those of Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, who tried
to intimidate Chinese citizens into revealing the whereabouts of leaders of the
unsuccessful 1989 student uprising in Tiananmen Square.
If your overall objective is to inform or persuade, it is probably ethical; if
your goal is to coerce or manipulate, it is unethical. But lawyers and ethicists do
not always agree on this distinction. As we have pointed out, Congress and the
U.S. Supreme Court have at times limited speech that incites sedition, violence,
and riot, but they have also protected free speech rights “for both the ideas that
people cherish and the thoughts they hate.”14
In a recent study of the relationship between people’s perceptions of free
speech and hate speech, researchers Daniel Downs and Gloria Cowan found
that perceptions about the importance of freedom of speech were negatively as-
sociated with judgments of the harm of hate speech. In other words, participants
who considered freedom of speech to be more important considered hate speech
4.3
2006	 State of Montana pardons those convicted under the Montana Sedition Act
of 1918.
2010	 White House Correspondent Helen Thomas retires amid controversy over
what some saw as her exercise of free speech.
2012	 FreeSpeechDebate.com becomes a venue for global online discussion and
debate about free speech.
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 55 11/5/14 3:18 PM
56 Speaking Freely and Ethically
4.3
to be less harmful. The investigators reason that, “Free-speech defenders may
recognize the harm of hate speech but believe that freedom of speech is more es-
sential than is censoring speech content.”15
Use Sound Evidence and Reasoning
Ethical speakers use critical thinking skills such as analysis and evaluation to
draw conclusions and formulate arguments. Unethical speakers substitute false
claims and manipulation of emotion for evidence and logical arguments.
In the early 1950s, Wisconsin senator Joseph McCarthy incited national
panic by charging that Communists were infiltrating every avenue of American
life. Thousands of people came under suspicion, and many lost jobs and careers
because of the false accusations. Never able to substantiate his claims, ­
McCarthy
nevertheless succeeded in his witch hunt by exaggerating and distorting the
truth. One United Press reporter noted, “The man just talked in circles. Every-
thing was by inference, allusion, never a concrete statement of fact. Most of it
didn’t make sense.”16 Although today we recognize the flimsiness of McCarthy’s
accusations, he nevertheless was able to manipulate emotions and fears to pro-
duce the results he wanted. It is sometimes tempting to resort to false claims to
gain power over others, but it is always unethical to do so.
Some speakers bypass sound evidence and reasoning in order to make their
conclusions more provocative. One contemporary rhetoric scholar offers the fol-
lowing example of such short-circuited reasoning:
Let’s say two people are observing who speaks in college classrooms and
they come up with
1.	 Women are not as good at public speaking as men.
2.	 In college classes on coed campuses where most professors are male,
women tend to talk less in class than men.17
The first conclusion, based on insufficient evidence, reinforces sexist stereo-
types with an inflammatory overgeneralization. The second, more qualified con-
clusion is more ethical.
One last, but important, requirement for the ethical use of evidence and rea-
soning is to share with an audience all information that might help them reach
a sound decision, including information that may be potentially damaging to
your case. Even if you proceed to refute the opposing evidence and arguments,
you have fulfilled your ethical responsibility by presenting the perspective of
the other side. And you can actually make your own arguments more convinc-
ing by anticipating and answering counterarguments and evidence.
Be Sensitive to and Tolerant of Differences
The filmmaker who ate nothing but McDonald’s meals for his Oscar-
nominated movie Super Size Me apologized for a profanity-laced, politi-
cally incorrect speech at a suburban Philadelphia school.
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 56 11/5/14 3:18 PM
57
Speaking Ethically 4.3
Among other things, Morgan Spurlock joked about the intelligence
of McDonald’s employees and teachers smoking pot while he was speak-
ing at Hatboro-Horsham High School.
Spurlock, 35, told The Philadelphia Inquirer in a telephone interview
that he “didn’t think of the audience” and could have chosen his words
better.18
Being audience-centered requires that you become as aware as possible of other
people’s feelings, needs, interests, and backgrounds. Spurlock clearly violated
this ethical principal in his remarks.
Sometimes called accommodation, sensitivity to differences does not mean
that speakers must abandon their own convictions or pander to those of their au-
dience members. It does mean that speakers should demonstrate a willingness
to listen to opposing viewpoints and learn about different beliefs and values.
Such willingness not only communicates respect; it can also help a speaker to se-
lect a topic, formulate a purpose, and design strategies to motivate an audience.
DePaul University communication professor Kathy Fitzpatrick notes, “Our
success in public diplomacy will turn on our ability to speak in ways that rec-
ognize and appreciate how [our audiences] will interpret our messages.”19 For
example, a Russian citizen recently pointed out a cultural contrast to your au-
thors, “Americans are always planning what they are going to do several years
in the future. In Russia, we do not plan beyond two or three weeks. Life is too
uncertain here.” Having gained this insight into Russian life, we know now that
it would raise false hopes or be dismissed as irrelevant if we were to attempt to
motivate Russian audiences with promises of benefits far in the future. Speak-
ing of immediate, deliverable rewards is a more realistic and ethical approach to
communication with our Russian friends.
A speaker who is sensitive to differences also avoids language that might
be interpreted as being in any way biased or offensive. Although it might seem
simple and a matter of common sense to avoid overtly abusive language, it is
not so easy to avoid language that discriminates more subtly. In Chapter 12, we
look at specific words and phrases that can be unintentionally offensive and that
ethical speakers should avoid.
Be Honest
In January 1998, President Bill Clinton’s finger-wagging declaration that “I did
not have sexual relations with that woman—Miss Lewinsky” was a serious
breach of ethics that came back to haunt him. Many Americans were willing to
forgive the inappropriate relationship; fewer could forgive the dishonesty.
In 2003, President George W. Bush and members of his staff accepted respon-
sibility for having told the public that Iraq was getting nuclear fuel from Africa,
even after intelligence reports several months earlier had discredited the claim.20
And in 2012, Susan Rice, then U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, lost
her chance to succeed Hillary Rodham Clinton as secretary of state when she
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 57 11/5/14 3:18 PM
58 Speaking Freely and Ethically
4.3
provided erroneous information to the media and public about a terrorist attack
on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya. Knowingly offering false or mislead-
ing information to an audience is an ethical violation with potentially serious
consequences.
A seeming exception to the dictum to avoid false information is the use of
hypothetical illustrations—stories about events that never actually occurred but
that might happen. Many speakers rely on such illustrations to clarify or en-
hance their speeches. As long as a speaker makes clear to the audience that the
illustration is indeed hypothetical—for example, prefacing the illustration with
a phrase such as “Imagine that . . . ”—such use is ethical.
Honesty also requires that speakers give credit for ideas and informa-
tion that are not their own. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological
­Association specifies that “an author does not present the work of another as if it
were his or her own work. This can extend to ideas as well as written words.”21
Presenting the words and ideas of others without crediting them is called pla-
giarism. This ethical violation is both serious enough and widespread enough to
warrant a separate discussion.
Don’t Plagiarize
Although some cultures may view unacknowledged borrowing from sources as a
sign of respect and humility and an attempt to be audience-centered, in the United
States and most other Western cultures, using the words, sentence structures,
and/or ideas of another person without crediting the source is a serious breach of
ethics. Yet even people who would never think of stealing money or shoplifting
may feel justified in plagiarizing—stealing ideas. One student commencement
speaker who plagiarized a speech by the writer Barbara Kingsolver explained his
action as resulting from the “expectation to produce something amazing.”22
Understand what Constitutes Plagiarism  Even if you have never
plagiarized anything as public as a commencement address, perhaps you can
remember copying a grade-school report directly from an online or printed en-
cyclopedia, or maybe you’ve even purchased or “borrowed” a paper to submit
for an assignment in high school or college. These are obvious forms of plagia-
rism. Less obvious forms include patchwriting—lacing a speech with compel-
ling phrases that you find in a source that you do not credit—failing to give
credit to a source or adequate information in a citation, or relying too heavily on
the vocabulary or sentence structure of a source.
Suppose your source says, “Based on historical data, it’s clear that large
­
areas of the West Coast are overdue for a massive earthquake.” You would be
plagiarizing if you changed only a word or two to say, “Based on historical data,
it’s clear that many parts of the West Coast are overdue for a huge earthquake.”
A better paraphrase would be, “For much of the West Coast, historical trends
show that ‘the big one’ should have already hit.”
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 58 11/5/14 3:18 PM
59
Speaking Ethically 4.3
Understand that Plagiarism may have Significant Consequences 
According to one source, 75 to 98 percent of college students admit to having
cheated at least once.23 At least one Web site claims to provide “non-plagiarized”
custom term papers—ironic, because using any such paper is exactly what con-
stitutes plagiarism!24 And communication researcher Todd Holm reports that
more than half of the students he surveyed admitted cheating in some way in a
public-speaking class.25
Despite the near-epidemic occurrence of plagiarism, most colleges impose
stiff penalties on students who plagiarize. Plagiarists almost always fail the as-
signment in question, frequently fail the course, and are sometimes put on aca-
demic probation or even expelled. And the risk of being caught is much greater
than you might suspect. Many colleges subscribe to a Web-based plagiarism de-
tection company such as Turnitin; other professors routinely use free detection
sites such as Grammarly or even Google.
A few years ago, one of your authors heard an excellent student speech on
the importance of detecting cancer early. The only problem was that she heard
the same speech again in the following class period! On finding the “speech”—
actually a Reader’s Digest article that was several years old—both students were
certain that they had discovered a surefire shortcut to an A. Instead, they failed
the assignment, ruined their course grades, and lost your author’s trust. The
consequences of plagiarism in other arenas can be even more dire, including the
loss of a job or the end of a promising career.
Do your Own Work  The most flagrant cases of plagiarism result from not
doing your own work. For example, while you are poking around the library
for ideas to use in a speech assignment, you might discover an entire speech or
perhaps an article that could easily be made into a speech. However tempting it
may be to use this material and however certain you are that no audience mem-
ber could possibly have seen it, resist the urge to plagiarize. Not only is the risk
of detection great, you will be shortchanging yourself if you do not learn how to
compose a speech on your own step by step.
Another way in which speakers sometimes attempt to shortcut the speech
preparation task is to ask another person to edit a speech so extensively that it
becomes more that other person’s work than their own. This is another form of
plagiarism as well as another way in which novice speakers can cheat them-
selves out of the skills they need to develop.
Acknowledge Your Sources  Our admonition to do your own work in
no way suggests that you should not research your speeches and then share
your findings with audience members. In fact, an ethical speaker is responsible
for doing just that. Furthermore, some information is so widely known that
you do not have to acknowledge a source for it. For example, you need not
credit a source if you say that a person must be infected with the HIV virus to
develop AIDS or that the Treaty of Versailles was signed in 1919. This infor-
mation is widely available in a variety of reference sources. However, if you
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 59 11/5/14 3:18 PM
60 Speaking Freely and Ethically
4.3
decide to use any of the following in your speech, you must give credit to the
source:
•	 Direct quotations, even if they are only brief phrases
•	 Opinions, assertions, or ideas of others, even if you paraphrase them rather
than quote them verbatim
•	 Statistics
•	 Any nonoriginal visual materials, including graphs, tables, and pictures
To be able to acknowledge your sources, you must first practice careful and
systematic note-taking. Indicate with quotation marks any phrases or sentences
that you photocopy, copy by hand, or electronically cut and past verbatim from
a source, and be sure to record the author, title, publisher or Web site, publica-
tion date, and page numbers for all sources from which you take quotations,
ideas, statistics, or visual materials.
Cite Sources Correctly  In addition to keeping careful records of your
sources, you must know how to cite sources for your audience, both orally and
in writing. Perhaps you have heard a speaker say, “Quote,” while holding up
both hands with index and middle fingers curved to indicate quotation marks.
Such air quotes are an artificial and distracting way to cite a source. As shown in
the How To box, an oral citation can be integrated more smoothly into a speech.
You can also provide a written citation for a source. In fact, your public-
speaking instructor may ask you to provide a bibliography of sources along
with the outline or other written materials he or she requires for each speech.
Instructors who require a bibliography will usually specify the format in which
they want the citations; if they do not, you can use a style guide such as those
published by the MLA (Modern Language Association) or the APA (American
Psychological Association), both of which are available online as well as in tradi-
tional print format. On the next page is an example of a written citation in MLA
format for the source cited orally in the earlier example. Notice that the citation
Incorporate an Oral Citation into Your Speech
On a 2013 Web page titled “Bed Bugs,” the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
outlines three problems caused by bedbug
infestations:
“property loss, expense, and inconve-
nience.”
HOW
TO
Provide the date.
Specify the type of resource.
Give the title.
Provide the author or source.
Pause briefly to signal that you are about to
begin quoting.
Quote the source.
Pause again to indicate that you are ending
the quoted passage.
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 60 11/5/14 3:18 PM
61
Speaking Ethically 4.3
provides two dates: the date of publication (included in the title of the article)
and the date the article was accessed by the researcher. If you are unable to find
the date the material was posted—or any other single element of information—
proceed directly to the next item in the citation.
“Bed Bugs.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 18 January
2013. Web. 09 June 2013.
Perhaps now you are thinking, “What about those ‘gray areas,’ those times
when I am not certain whether information or ideas I am presenting are com-
mon knowledge?” A good rule is this: When in doubt, document. You will never
be guilty of plagiarism if you document something you didn’t need to, but you
could be committing plagiarism if you do not document something you really
should have documented.
Quick Check
The Ethical Public Speaker . . .
•	 Has a clear, responsible goal.
•	 Uses sound evidence and reasoning.
•	 Is sensitive to and tolerant of differences.
•	 Is honest.
•	 Avoids plagiarism.
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 61 11/5/14 3:18 PM
62 Chapter 4 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
4.1	 Explain the relationships among ethics, free speech, and credibility.
In the United States, citizens have the right to speak freely, but that right comes
with the responsibility to speak ethically. Speaking ethically allows your audi-
ence to trust you. Being trustworthy is an important part of being credible, or
believable.
Key Terms
Free speech
Ethics
Credibility
4.2	 Explain how free speech has been both challenged and defended
throughout U.S. history.
Although the U.S. Congress and courts have occasionally limited the constitu-
tional right to free speech, more often they have protected and broadened its
application. Social media offer a new context for twenty-first-century challenges
to free speech.
Key Terms
First Amendment
Speech act
4.3	 List and explain five criteria for ethical public speaking.
An ethical public speaker should have a clear, responsible goal; use sound evi-
dence and reasoning; be sensitive to and tolerant of differences; be honest; and
take appropriate steps to avoid plagiarism. Avoid plagiarizing by doing your
own work and acknowledging—orally, in writing, or both—the sources for any
quotations, ideas, statistics, or visual materials you use in a speech.
Key Terms
Ethical speech
Accommodation
Plagiarizing
Patchwriting
Oral citation
Written citation
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 62 11/5/14 3:18 PM
63
Chapter 4 study guide
Think about These Questions
•	 Explain how ethical behavior serves as a balance to free speech.
•	 Why do you think the U.S. Supreme Court has historically considered flag
burning and pornography to be “free speech acts”?
•	 From at least the time of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, speechwriters have
written many of the best speeches made by U.S. presidents. Is such use of
speechwriters ethical? Is it ethical to give credit to the presidents for memo-
rable lines from speeches written by professional speechwriters?
•	 The following passage comes from the book Abraham Lincoln, Public Speaker,
by Waldo W. Braden:
The Second Inaugural Address, sometimes called Lincoln’s Sermon
on the Mount, was a concise, tightly constructed composition that did
not waste words on ceremonial niceties or superficial sentiment. The
shortest Presidential inaugural address up to that time, it was only 700
words long, compared to 3,700 words for the First, and required from
5 to 7 minutes to deliver.26
Which of the following statements should be credited to Braden if you were to
use them in a speech?
“Lincoln’s second inaugural address is sometimes called Lincoln’s
Sermon on the Mount.”
“Because he was elected and sworn in for two terms as president,
Abraham Lincoln prepared and delivered two inaugural addresses.”
“Lincoln’s second inaugural address was 700 words and 5 to 7 minutes
long.”
M04_BEEB3981_05_SE_C04_049-064.indd 63 11/5/14 3:18 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
Part 2
Analyzing
an Audience
Chapter 5	 Listening to Speeches
Chapter 6	 Analyzing Your Audience
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Analyzing
an
Audience
Chapters
5-6
2
M05A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB2.indd 1 11/18/14 8:27 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Chapter 5  Listening to Speeches
1.	 List four common goals for listening and give examples of situations in which you’ve
had each goal.
2.	 What is your most common barrier to effective listening, and which strategies from this
chapter will help you most in overcoming it?
Chapter 6  Analyzing Your Audience
1.	 What three things should you look for when analyzing information you have gathered
about your audience?
2.	 What four methods can you use to adapt your message to a diverse audience?
3.	 List four factors you should gather information about to help you analyze your speak-
ing situation.
4.	 List four types of listener response you can use to analyze your audience after you’ve
finished speaking.
5.	 What is one way you can adapt your message if, while you are speaking, you realize
you are not holding listeners’ attention?
Analyzing
an
Audience
Chapters
5-6
2
M05A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB2.indd 2 11/18/14 8:27 PM
65
Chapter 5
Listening to
Speeches
“Learn how to
­
listen and you
will prosper—
even from those
who talk badly.”
—Plutarch
	5.1	Effective Listening
Select
Attend
Understand
Remember
Respond
	5.2	Overcoming Barriers to Effective
Listening
Information Overload
Personal Concerns
Outside Distractions
Prejudice
Differences between Speech Rate
and Thought Rate
Outline
(continued)
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 65 07/11/14 11:44 AM
66 Listening to Speeches
﻿5
Learning Objectives
	5.1	Describe the five stages of listening.
	5.2	List and describe five barriers to effective listening.
	5.3	Identify and implement strategies for becoming a better listener.
	5.4	Identify and implement strategies for improving your critical
listening and critical thinking skills.
	5.5	Use criteria to effectively and appropriately evaluate speeches.
A psychology professor had dedicated his life to teaching and worked hard to
prepare interesting lectures, yet he found his students sitting through his talks
with glassy-eyed expressions.1 To find out what was on his students’ minds if
they were not focusing on psychology, he would, without warning, fire a blank
from a gun and then ask his students to record their thoughts at the instant they
heard the shot. Here is what he found:
20 percent were pursuing erotic thoughts or sexual fantasies.
20 percent were reminiscing about something (they weren’t sure what they
were thinking about).
20 percent were worrying about something or thinking about lunch.
8 percent were pursuing religious thoughts.
20 percent were reportedly listening.
12 percent were able to recall what the professor was talking about when the
gun fired.
Like this professor, you probably would prefer that more than 12 percent of
your audience could recall your messages. Understanding how listeners
listen can help you to improve your ability to connect with your audience.
	5.3	How to Become a Better Listener
Listen with Your Eyes as Well as
Your Ears
Listen Mindfully
Listen Skillfully
Listen Ethically
	5.4	Listening and Critical Thinking
Separate Facts from Inferences
Evaluate the Quality of Evidence
Evaluate the Underlying Logic and
Reasoning
	5.5	Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches
Understanding Criteria for
Evaluating Speeches
Identifying and Analyzing
Rhetorical Strategies
Giving Feedback to Others
Giving Feedback to Yourself
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 66 07/11/14 11:44 AM
67
Effective Listening 5.1
Considerable evidence also suggests that your own listening skills could be
improved. Within twenty-four hours after listening to a lecture or speech, you
will most likely recall only about 50 percent of the message. Forty-eight hours
later, you are above average if you remember more than 25 percent of the mes-
sage. Learning about listening can help you to improve your listening skills so
that you can gain more benefits from the speeches you hear.
In this chapter, we discuss how people listen, and we identify barriers
and pitfalls that keep both speakers and audiences from listening effectively.
Our goal is not only to help you remember what speakers say, but also to be a
more thoughtful, ethical, and critical listener to the messages you hear. We’ll
offer tips to improve your ability to analyze and evaluate speeches, including
your own.
Effective Listening
5.1	 Describe the five stages of listening.
Listening is a complex process of selecting, attending to, creating meaning from,
remembering, and responding to verbal and nonverbal messages. Understand-
ing these components of listening can help you to retain more, and it can help
you to be a better speaker and a better listener. And research confirms that good
listening skills can improve the quality of both your life and your career.2
Select
To select a sound, the first stage of listening, is to single out a message from sev-
eral competing messages. As a public speaker, your job is to develop a message
that motivates listeners to focus on your message.
Attend
The sequel to selecting is attending. To attend to a sound is to focus on it. Most
people’s average attention span while listening to someone talk is about 8 seconds.3
One of your key challenges as a public speaker is to capture and then hold your
audience’s attention. Your choice of supporting material is often the key to gaining
and maintaining attention.
Understand
Boiled down to its essence, communication is the process of understanding,
or making sense of our experiences and sharing that sense with others.4 As a
speaker, your job is to help your listeners understand by making sure you clearly
explain your ideas in terms and images to which your listeners can relate. Again,
the challenge of being understood comes back to a focus on the audience.
5.1
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 67 07/11/14 11:44 AM
68 Listening to Speeches
5.1
Remember
The next stage in the listening process is remembering. To remember is to recall
ideas and information. You hear more than one billion words each year, but how
much information do you retain? It depends on how well you listen. Most listen-
ing experts believe that the main way to determine whether audience members
have been listening is to determine what they remember. (That’s the purpose of
taking tests in school: to assess what you remember and understand from what
you’ve heard and read.)
Respond
The final stage in the listening process is responding. When listeners respond,
they react with their behavior to what they have heard. That’s why it’s useful for
public speakers to develop specific behavioral goals for their talks. As a speaker,
you should identify what you would like listeners to be able to do after you
speak. It could be that you want them simply to remember and restate your key
ideas. Or you might want them to vote for someone, buy something, or enroll in
a course.
Speakers should identify a specific behavior—such as voting—that they want listeners to
perform.
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 68 07/11/14 11:45 AM
69
Overcoming Barriers to Effective Listening 5.2
Overcoming Barriers to Effective
Listening
5.2	 List and describe five barriers to effective listening.
Listening barriers are created when we fail to select, attend to, or understand a
message or remember what was said.
Information Overload
We spend a large part of each day listening. That’s good news and bad news.
The good news is that because we listen a lot, we have the potential to become
very effective listeners. The bad news is that instead of getting better at it, we
often tune out because we hear so much information that we get tired of listen-
ing. Researchers in listening have developed what they call the working mem-
ory theory of listening, which explains why we sometimes just don’t listen
well. The theory suggests that when a listener’s capacity is reached (when the
working memory is full), then it’s harder to concentrate and remember what
we hear.5
Although this theory might make it appear that there’s nothing you can do
as either a speaker or a listener to manage this problem, the strategies described
in the How To box can both help to ensure that those who listen to you continue
to attend to your message and help you improve your own listening skills.
Personal Concerns
You are sitting in your history class on a Friday afternoon. It’s a beautiful day
outside, and as you are listening, you begin to mentally plan your weekend.
Suddenly you hear your professor say, “For Monday’s test, you will be expected
to know the principles I’ve just reviewed.” What principles? What test? You
5.2
Quick Check
Effective Listening
To listen effectively, you need to:
•	 Select a message
•	 Attend to it
•	 Understand the message
•	 Remember it
•	 Respond appropriately to it
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 69 07/11/14 11:45 AM
70 Listening to Speeches
5.2
were present in class and you did hear the professor’s lecture, but you’re not
sure what was said.
Your own thoughts are among the biggest competitors for your attention
when you are a member of an audience. Most of us would rather listen to our
own inner speech than to the message of a public speaker. As the psychology
professor with the gun discovered, sex, lunch, worries, and daydreams are ma-
jor distractions for the majority of listeners.
WHAT YOU CAN DO AS A SPEAKER  Focus on maintaining your audience’s
attention, using occasional “wake-up” messages such as “Now listen carefully,
because this will affect your future grade (or family, or employment).” Deliver
your message effectively by using good eye contact, speaking with appropriate
volume and vocal variation, and using appropriate gestures for emphasis.
WHAT YOU CAN DO AS A LISTENER  To stay focused you must stop the
mental conversation you are having with yourself about ideas that are unrelated
to the speaker’s message. First, be aware of thoughts, worries, and daydreams
that are competing for your attention. Then, once you are aware that you are off
task, return your attention to what the speaker is saying.
Outside Distractions
While sitting in class, you notice that the person in front of you is surfing the
Internet on her tablet computer. Two classmates behind you are chatting about
their favorite soap opera plots. You feel your phone vibrate with an incoming
text message. As your history professor drones on about the Bay of Pigs inva-
sion, you find it difficult to focus on his lecture. Use the tips in the How To box
to help you reduce physical distractions that compete with the speaker.
Prevent Information Overload
As a listener
•	 Recognize when you are not being a good listener.  Then try to improve your listening by look-
ing at the speaker, sitting up straight, and focusing on the message.
As a speaker
•	 Pace the flow of new ideas and information.  Communication expert Frank E. X. Dance recom-
mends a 30/70 balance: 30 percent of your speaking time should be spent presenting new
ideas and information, and 70 percent of your time should be spent supporting the ideas with
vivid examples and interesting stories.6
•	 Build redundancy into your message.  Repeating key ideas can be part of that 70 percent of
your message that extends the new information you present. If listeners miss the idea the first
time you present it, perhaps they will catch it during your concluding summary.
HOW
TO
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 70 07/11/14 11:45 AM
71
Overcoming Barriers to Effective Listening 5.2
Prejudice
Your buddy is a staunch Democrat. During the broadcast of a speech by the Re-
publican governor of your state, he constantly argues against the governor’s
suggestions. The next day, he is surprised to see editorials in the press praising
the governor’s speech. “Did they hear the same speech I did?” your friend won-
ders. Yes, they heard the same speech, but they listened differently. When you
prejudge a message, your ability to understand it decreases.
Another way to prejudge a speech is to decide that the topic has little value
for you before you even hear the message. Most of us at one time or another
have not given our full attention to a speech because we decided beforehand
that it was going to bore us.
Sometimes we make snap judgments about a speaker based on his or her
appearance and then fail to listen because we dismiss the speaker’s ideas in
advance as inconsequential or irrelevant. Female speakers often complain that
males in the audience do not listen to them as attentively as they would to an-
other male; members of ethnic and racial minorities may feel slighted in a simi-
lar way.
On the flip side, some people too readily accept what someone says just be-
cause they like the way the person looks, sounds, or dresses. For example, Tex
believes that anyone with a Texas drawl must be an honest person. Such positive
prejudices can also inhibit your ability to listen accurately to a message. Use the
tips in the How To box to help you overcome your prejudices.
Minimize Outside Distractions
As a listener
•	 Control your own distractions.  Sit where you can’t see out the door or window. Keep your
(silenced) phone in your bag. Consider moving to another seat if people near you are talking or
a rude mobile phone user continues to text.
•	 Help the speaker manage the environment.  You might need to close the blinds, turn up the
heat, turn off the lights, close the door, or do whatever is necessary to minimize distractions.
As a speaker
•	 Empathize with your listeners. Before your speech, sit where your audience will be seated, and
look for possible distractions. Then do the best you can to reduce or eliminate those distrac-
tions.
•	 Try to control the physical arrangement of the speaking situation. Rearrange seating if you can,
close windows and window shades; turn off blinking fluorescent lights; tactfully try to discour-
age whispering or phone use in the audience.
HOW
TO
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 71 07/11/14 11:45 AM
72 Listening to Speeches
5.2
Differences between Speech Rate and Thought
Rate
Most people talk at a rate of 125 words a minute. But you have the ability to
listen seven to ten times faster, as many as 700 to 1,200 words a minute!7 The dif-
ference between your ability to process words and the speed at which a speaker
can produce them gives you time to ignore a speaker periodically. Eventually,
you stop listening; the extra time allows you to daydream and drift from the
message. Instead of drifting away from the speech, however, you can enhance
your listening effectiveness by mentally summarizing what the speaker is say-
ing from time to time.
WHAT YOU CAN DO AS A SPEAKER  Just talking faster won’t do much good.
Even if you could speak as fast as two hundred words a minute, your listen-
ers would still want you to talk about four times faster than that. Instead, you
need to build in message redundancy, use clear transitions, be well organized,
and make your major ideas clear. A well-structured message that uses appropri-
ate internal summaries helps your listeners catch your message even if they’ve
tuned out for a bit here and there.
WHAT YOU CAN DO AS A LISTENER  Because you have the ability to think
much faster than people speak, you can use that dazzling mental power to stay
focused on the message. Periodically making a mental summary of what the
speaker is saying can dramatically improve your ability to remember the infor-
mation. The difference between speech rate and thought rate gives you time to
sprinkle in several mental summaries when listening to a message.
Counteract Prejudice
As a listener
•	 Focus on the message rather than on the messenger.  Guard against becoming so critical of a
message that you don’t listen to it or becoming so impressed that you decide too quickly that
the speaker is trustworthy.
As a speaker
•	 Grab the audience’s attention with your opening statements. This helps to keep listeners from
making inaccurate snap judgments based on prejudice.
•	 Be clear and specific. Avoid examples, words, or phrases that could be misinterpreted. Focus
on your particular listeners’ interests, needs, hopes, and wishes.
•	 Use detailed arguments and credible evidence. When addressing an audience that may be
critical of or hostile toward your message, strong emotional appeals will be less successful
than will careful language, sound reasoning, and convincing evidence.
HOW
TO
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 72 07/11/14 11:45 AM
73
How to Become a Better Listener 5.3
How to Become a Better Listener
5.3	 Identify and implement strategies for becoming a better listener.
Now that we have examined barriers to effective listening and have suggested
a few strategies to overcome those barriers and be both a better listener and a
better speaker, we offer additional strategies for improving your listening skills.
Specifically, we’ll help you listen with your eyes, we’ll help you be a mindful
listener, and we’ll note specific behaviors that can help you listen skillfully.
Listen with Your Eyes as Well as Your Ears
To listen with your eyes is to be attuned to the unspoken cues of a speaker.
Nonverbal cues play a major role in communicating a message. One expert has
estimated that as much as 93 percent of the emotional content of a speech is
conveyed by nonverbal cues.8 Even though this statistic does not apply in every
situation, emotion is communicated primarily by unspoken messages. To “listen
with your eyes,” you need to accurately interpret what you see while ensuring
that you don’t allow yourself to be distracted by it, even if a speaker has poor
delivery.
ACCURATELY INTERPRET NONVERBAL MESSAGES  Because the nonverbal
message plays such a powerful role in affecting how you respond to a speaker,
it’s important to accurately interpret what a speaker is expressing nonverbally.
Use these techniques to help you decode nonverbal messages:
•	 Look at the speaker’s face and gestures. A speaker’s facial expressions will help
you to identify the emotions being communicated; a speaker’s posture and
gestures often reinforce the intensity of the emotion.9
•	 Look at the context. When interpreting an unspoken message, consider the
situation you and the speaker are in.
•	 Look for clusters of cues. Don’t just focus on one nonverbal cue. Instead, look
for several nonverbal cues to increase the accuracy of your interpretation.
•	 Look for cues that communicate liking, power, and responsiveness. Eye contact,
facial expression, and body orientation can often express how much
someone likes us. We note people’s degree of power or influence over
us by the way they dress, how much space they have around them, and
whether they are relaxed or tense. People who perceive themselves as
having more power than those around them are usually more relaxed.
To observe whether someone is interested or focused on you, note that
person’s level of eye contact and his or her head nods, facial expressions,
and tone of voice.
If you have trouble understanding a speaker, either because he or she speaks
too softly or because he or she speaks in an unfamiliar dialect, get close enough
5.3
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 73 07/11/14 11:45 AM
74 Listening to Speeches
5.3
that you can see the speaker’s mouth. A good view can increase your level of at-
tention and improve your understanding.
ADAPT TO THE SPEAKER’S DELIVERY  Good listeners focus on a speaker’s
message, not on delivery style. To be a good listener, you must adapt to the
particular idiosyncrasies that some speakers have. You might have to ignore or
overlook a speaker’s tendency to mumble, speak in a monotone, or fail to make
eyecontact.Perhapsmoredifficultstill,youmightevenhavetoforgiveaspeaker’s
lack of clarity or coherence. Rather than mentally criticizing an unpolished
speaker, you might need to be sympathetic and try harder to concentrate on the
message. Good listeners focus on the message, not on the messenger.
Poor speakers are not the only challenge to good listening. You also need
to guard against glib, well-polished speakers. Just because a speaker has an
attractive style of delivery does not necessarily mean that the message is credi-
ble. Don’t let a smooth-talking salesperson convince you to buy something with-
out carefully considering the content of the message.
Listen Mindfully
Mindful listeners are mentally focused on the listening task. Two listening
researchers found that good listeners do the following:10
•	 Put their own thoughts aside
•	 Are present mentally as well as physically
•	 Make a conscious, mindful effort to listen
•	 Invest time in listening, patiently letting the speaker make his or her point
•	 Are open-minded
Bad listeners do just the opposite; they are distracted by their own thoughts,
are mentally absent, are impatient, and are less open to what they hear. To be a
mindful listener is to be aware of what you are doing when listening to others.
How do you do that? Here are some specific strategies to help you be a mindful
listener.
BE AWARE OF WHETHER YOU ARE LISTENING OR NOT  It’s vital that you
be aware of whether you are on-task or off-task when listening to someone.
Unmindful listeners are not conscious of whether they are paying attention or
daydreaming. As you are listening, occasionally take a moment to think about
your own thoughts. Pretend that you are in that class when the professor fires
the gun. At the moment, are you thinking about the message or have you
allowed your thoughts to stray off-task? If you become aware that you’re not
listening, research has found that you can increase your motivation to stay
on-task by reminding yourself why listening is important or useful to you.11
MONITOR YOUR EMOTIONAL REACTION TO A MESSAGE  Yin Ping is an
Asian American who has distinguished himself as a champion debater on the
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 74 07/11/14 11:45 AM
75
How to Become a Better Listener 5.3
college debate team. One sly member of an opposing team sought to distract
him by quoting a bigoted statement that disparaged Asian Americans for “tak-
ing over the country.” It was tempting for Yin Ping to respond emotionally to
the insult, but he kept his wits, refuted the argument, and went on to win the
debate. Heightened emotions can affect your ability to understand a message. If
you become angry at a word or phrase that a speaker uses, your listening com-
prehension decreases.
The particular words that cause listeners to become emotionally aroused
depend on the listeners’ cultural backgrounds, religious convictions, and
political views. For most listeners, words that connote negative opinions about
their ethnic origin, nationality, or religious views can trigger strong emotions.
Cursing and obscene language are red flags for other listeners. When some-
one uses a word or phrase you find offensive, it’s important to overcome your
repugnance and continue to listen. Don’t let a speaker’s language close down
your mind.
How can you keep your emotions in check when you hear something that
sets you off? First, recognize when your emotional state is affecting your rational
thoughts. Second, use the skill of self-talk to calm yourself down. Say to your-
self, “I’m not going to let this anger get in the way of listening and understand-
ing.” You can also focus on your breathing for a moment to calm down.
BE A SELFISH LISTENER  Although it might sound crass to suggest it, being
a selfish listener can help you to maintain your powers of concentration. If
you find your attention waning, ask yourself questions such as “What’s in
this for me?” and “How can I use information from this talk?” Granted, you
will find more useful information in some presentations than in others, but
be alert to the possibility in all speeches. Find ways to benefit from the infor-
mation you are listening to, and try to connect it with your own experiences
and needs.
Listen Skillfully
Besides being aware of nonverbal messages and being mindful listeners, good
listeners enact certain behaviors that help them to stay focused and remember
what they’ve heard. They identify their listening goal, listen for major ideas,
practice good listening methods, adapt their listening style as necessary, and are
active listeners.
IDENTIFY YOUR LISTENING GOAL  As Figure 5.1 shows, you invest a lot of
your communication time in listening. If you are a typical student, you spend
over 80 percent of your day involved in communication-related activities.12
You listen a lot. Your challenge is to stay on course and keep your listening
focused.
One way to stay focused is to determine your listening purpose. There are
at least four major listening goals: listening for pleasure, listening to empathize,
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 75 07/11/14 11:45 AM
76 Listening to Speeches
5.3
listening to evaluate, and listening to gain information. Being conscious of your
listening goal can help you listen more effectively. For example, if your listening
goal is simply to enjoy what you hear, you need not listen at the same intensity
as when you are trying to remember what you are hearing.
Listening for Pleasure  You listen to some things just for the fun of it.
You might watch TV, listen to music, go to a movie, or chat with a friend. You
won’t be tested on Friends reruns. Nor will you be asked to remember every
joke in the late-night host’s monologue. So when listening for pleasure, just
enjoy what you hear. You can, however, observe how effective speakers and
entertainers gain and maintain your attention and keep you interested in their
messages.
Listening to Empathize  To have empathy means to feel what the speaker
is feeling. Usually, empathic listening occurs in one-on-one listening situations
with a good friend. Sometimes, in your job, you might need to listen empathi-
cally to a client, customer, or coworker. Listening to empathize requires these
essential steps:
 1.	Stop. Stop what you are doing, and give your complete attention to the
speaker.
 2.	Look. Make eye contact, and pay attention to nonverbal cues that reveal
­emotions.
writing
11%
reading
17%
speaking
17%
listening
55%
Figure 5.1  You listen a lot. A typical
student spends about 11% of his or
her communication time writing, 17%
reading, 17% speaking, and at least 55%
listening.13
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle
River, NJ.
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 76 11/11/14 4:34 PM
77
How to Become a Better Listener 5.3
 3.	Listen. Pay attention to both the details of the message and the major ideas.
 4.	Imagine. Visualize how you would feel if you had experienced what the
speaker experienced.
 5.	Check. Check your understanding of the message by asking questions to clar-
ify what you heard and by summarizing what you think you heard.
LISTENING TO EVALUATE  When you evaluate a message, you are making
a judgment about its content. You are interested in whether the information is
reliable, true, or useful. When evaluating what you hear, the challenge is to not
become so critical of the message that you miss a key point the speaker is mak-
ing. Rather, you must juggle three very difficult tasks: You must make judgments
as well as understanding and recalling the information you are hearing. Your
biases and judgments act as noise, sometimes causing you to misunderstand the
intended meaning of the message.
LISTENING FOR INFORMATION  Since preschool, you have been in listening
situations in which someone wanted you to learn something. Keys to listening for
information are listening for the details of a message and making certain that you
link the details to major ideas. Poor listeners either listen only for facts and pieces of
a message or are interested only in the bottom line. By concentrating on both facts
and major ideas while also mentally summarizing the information you hear, you
can dramatically improve your ability to remember messages. Also, remember to
compare unfamiliar information to ideas and concepts with which you are familiar.
LISTEN FOR MAJOR IDEAS  In a classic study, Ralph Nichols asked both good
and poor listeners what their listening strategies were.14 The poor listeners in-
dicated that they listened for facts, such as names and dates. The good listeners
reported that they listened for major ideas and principles. Facts are useful only
when you can connect them to a principle or concept. In speeches, facts as well
as examples are used primarily to support major ideas. Try to mentally summa-
rize the major idea that the specific facts support.
If you heard President Barack Obama deliver his Second Inaugural Address
in Washington, D.C., on the cold morning of January 22, 2013, you heard him
introduce his key idea about two minutes into his speech by repeating these
three words: “We the people. . . .” A good listener would recognize that these
words reveal a core idea of the speech—that it takes a collaborative effort to do
good things.
How can you tell what the major ideas in a speech are? A speaker who is
well organized or familiar with good speaking techniques will offer a preview
of the major ideas early in the speech. If no preview is provided, listen for the
speaker to enumerate major points: “My first point is that the history of Jackson
County is evident in its various styles of architecture.” Transitional phrases and
a speaker’s internal summaries are other clues that can help you to identify the
major points. If your speaker provides few overt indicators, you might have to
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 77 07/11/14 11:45 AM
78 Listening to Speeches
5.3
discover them on your own. In that event, mentally summarize the ideas that
are most useful to you. As we suggested earlier, be a selfish listener. Treat a dis-
organized speech as a river with gold in its sands. Take your mental mining pan,
and search for the nuggets of meaning.
PRACTICE LISTENING  Because you spend at least 55 percent of your com-
munication time listening, you might wonder why we suggest that you practice
listening. The reason is that listening skills do not develop automatically. You
learn to swim by getting proper instruction; you’re unlikely to develop good
aquatic skills by just jumping in the water and flailing around. Similarly, you
will learn to listen by practicing the methods we recommend.
Researchers believe that poor listeners avoid challenge. For example, they
listen to and watch TV situation comedies rather than documentaries or other
informative programs. Skill develops as you practice listening to speeches,
music, and programs with demanding content.
UNDERSTAND YOUR LISTENING STYLE  New research suggests that not
­
everyone listens to information in the same way. There are at least four different
listening styles—preferred ways of making sense out of spoken messages. Lis-
tening researchers have discovered that many listeners have one of the following
listening styles: relational, analytical, critical, or task-oriented.15 Understanding
your listening style can help you to become a better and more flexible listener.16
About 40 percent of listeners have one primary listening style; another 40
percent use more than one style; and about 20 percent don’t have a listening
style preference.17 The best listeners are flexible listeners who can adapt their
listening style to fit the occasion and the person speaking.18
RELATIONAL-ORIENTED LISTENERS  You’re a relational-oriented listener if
you are comfortable listening to people express feelings and emotions. It’s likely
that you are highly empathic and that you seek common ground with the per-
son you are listening to. You enjoy hearing stories about people and personal
relationships and are easily moved by poignant illustrations and anecdotes.
Relational-oriented listeners are generally less apprehensive than other types of
listeners when speaking with others in interpersonal and group situations.19
TASK-ORIENTED LISTENERS  Task-oriented listeners want to know what to
do with the information that they hear. They listen for the verbs—the action
words that indicate what task should be completed or action should be taken
after listening to the information. The task-oriented listener wants people
to get to the point; a long story or a lengthy personal example without some
direction is less satisfying to a task-oriented listener than is a call for action.
Task-oriented listeners also seem to be more skeptical than people with other
listening styles. They prefer to be given evidence to support recommendations
for action.
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 78 07/11/14 11:45 AM
79
How to Become a Better Listener 5.3
ANALYTICAL LISTENERS  Analytical listeners prefer to listen to complex
information that is laced with facts and details. They often withhold judg-
ment before reaching a specific conclusion. You’re an analytical listener if you
reject messages because they don’t have adequate evidence to support the con-
clusions. In addition, analytical listeners don’t like rambling stories that don’t
seem to have a point; they want to know what the key facts are rather than
listen to a long narrative. Analytical listeners make good judges or lawyers
because they enjoy listening to debates and hearing arguments for and against
ideas.20
CRITICAL LISTENERS  You’re a critical listener if you spend time evaluating
the messages you hear. Critical listeners are comfortable listening to detailed,
complex information yet can focus on contradictions and inconsistencies in the
information presented. Critical listeners are also likely to catch errors in the over-
all reasoning and evidence that are used to reach a conclusion.
Knowing your listening style can help you ethically adapt your listening
style to the speaking styles of the speakers you hear. For example, if you are
an analytical listener and a speaker is telling long, meandering stories, or a
­
relational-oriented listener and you’re listening to a message that’s primarily
facts, principles, and ideas, you’ll have to tell yourself to concentrate harder on
the message.
BECOME AN ACTIVE LISTENER  An active listener is one who remains alert
and mentally re-sorts, rephrases, and repeats key information when listening to
a speech, as described in the How To box. Because you can listen to words much
faster than a speaker can speak them, it’s natural for your mind to wander. But
you can use the extra time to focus on interpreting what the speaker says.
Become an Active Listener
If you follow these steps for active listening, you will find yourself feeling stimulated and engaged
instead of tired and bored as you listen to even the dullest of speakers:
	1.	
Re-sort.  If the speaker is rambling, seek ways to rearrange his or her ideas into a new,
more logical pattern. For example, sometimes you can re-sort the ideas into a chronological
pattern: What happened first, second, and so on? Listen for “information handles” provided
by the speaker in the form of preview, transitions, signposts, and summary statements to
help you to re-sort and remain actively involved as a listener.
	2.	
Rephrase.  Listen for main ideas, and then paraphrase those ideas in your own words. You
are more likely to remember your mental paraphrase than the speaker’s exact words. If you
can, try to mentally summarize what the speaker is saying in a phrase that might fit on a
bumper sticker.
	3.	
Repeat.  Periodically, repeat to yourself key points you want to remember. Go back to
essential ideas, and restate them to yourself every five minutes or so.
HOW
TO
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 79 07/11/14 11:45 AM
80 Listening to Speeches
5.3
Listen Ethically
An effective listener does more than just gain an accurate understanding of a
speaker’s message; effective listeners are also ethical listeners. An ethical listener
participates in a communication by honestly communicating his or her expecta-
tions, providing helpful feedback, and being sensitive to and tolerating differences
when listening to others. In the fourth century b.c.e., Aristotle warned, “Let men
be on their guard against those who flatter and mislead the multitude.” And con-
temporary rhetorician Harold Barrett has said that the audience is the “necessary
source of correction” for the behavior of a speaker.21 The following guidelines for
ethical listening incorporate what Barrett calls “attributes of the good audience.”
COMMUNICATE YOUR EXPECTATIONS AND FEEDBACK  As an audience
member, you have the right—even the responsibility—to enter a communication sit-
uation with expectations about both the message and how the speaker will deliver
it. Know what information and ideas you want to get out of the communication
transaction. Expect a coherent, organized, and competently delivered presentation.
Communicate your objectives and react to the speaker’s message and deliv-
ery through appropriate nonverbal and verbal feedback. For example, maintain
eye contact with the speaker. Nod in agreement when you support something
the speaker says. There is evidence that by being a supportive listener in these
ways, you help the speaker to feel more comfortable and less nervous.22 We’re
not suggesting, however, that you fake your support for a speaker. If you show,
with an honest, quizzical look, that you do not understand a speaker’s point,
you can help an attentive, audience-centered speaker to rephrase the message
for better listener comprehension. Turn your head to one side and tilt it slightly
forward to communicate that you’re having trouble hearing. If a question-and-
answer period follows the speech, ask any questions that you still have about
the speaker’s topic or point of view.
BE SENSITIVE TO AND TOLERANT OF DIFFERENCES  As an ethical listener,
remember that your preferred approach to speaking and listening may differ from
the approach a speaker is using. But your preference doesn’t make the speaker’s
approach a wrong one. For example, suppose you were to attend a high school
baccalaureate ceremony at which the speaker was a dynamic African American
minister who used a duet-style, call-and-response type of speaking, in which the
audience periodically responds verbally to the speaker. If you were to dismiss the
minister’s delivery as too flamboyant, you might miss out on a powerful message.
BE AWARE THAT DIFFERENT CULTURES HAVE DIFFERENT STYLES OF
SPEAKING  Diverse cultural norms can sometimes pose a complex ethical-
listening challenge. For example, political and civil rights leader Jesse Jackson
has in the past been accused of making dishonest claims in some of his speeches
about his background and behavior. He has said that he left the University of Illi-
nois because of racism on the football team, which caused him to be passed over
for starting quarterback—yet former teammates insist that he did not become
starting quarterback simply because he was not the strongest player. Jackson has
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 80 07/11/14 11:45 AM
81
Listening and Critical Thinking 5.4
also overstated the poverty he experienced as a child, when in fact he grew up in
a fairly comfortable middle-class home. Although many people have criticized
such exaggeration, at least one communication researcher has defended Jackson,
arguing that although his “tall tales” are not necessarily “the truth” in a strictly
objective sense, they are part of a valid African American oral tradition that
focuses on the “symbolic import of the story” and in which speakers tradition-
ally exaggerate to enhance the impact of their illustrations.23 When you consider
the cultural expectations and backgrounds of both the speaker and the listeners,
you will be in a better position to interpret what is being expressed.
Be attentive and courteous. Consider diverse cultural norms and audience
expectations as part of the context within which you listen to and evaluate the
speaker. Making an effort to understand the needs, goals, and interests of both
the speaker and other audience members can help you to judge how to react ap-
propriately and ethically as a listener. Table 5.1 summarizes all the skills of better
listening that we have discussed.
Listening and Critical Thinking
5.4	 Identify and implement strategies for improving your critical listening
and critical thinking skills.
Effective listening requires the ability to listen critically. Listening critically and
thinking critically both involve a variety of skills that we reexamine through-
out this text. Critical listening is the process of listening to evaluate the quality,
5.4
Table 5.1  Enhance Your Listening Skills
The Good Listener . . . The Poor Listener . . .
Listen with Your Eyes as
Well as Your Ears
•	 Looks for nonverbal cues to enhance under-
standing
•	 Adapts to the speaker’s delivery
•	 Focuses only on the words
•	 Is easily distracted by the delivery of the
speech
Listen Mindfully •	 Is aware of whether or not he or she is listening
•	 Controls emotions
•	 Mentally asks, “What’s in it for me?”
•	 Is not aware of whether he or she is
on-task or off-task
•	 Erupts emotionally when listening
•	 Does not attempt to relate to the informa-
tion personally
Listen Skillfully •	 Identifies the listening goal
•	 Listens for major ideas
•	 Seeks opportunities to practice listening skills
•	 Understands and adapts his or her listening style
to the speaker
•	 Listens actively by re-sorting, rephrasing, and
repeating what is heard
•	 Does not have a listening goal in mind
•	 Listens for isolated facts
•	 Avoids listening to difficult information
•	 Is not aware of how to capitalize on his or
her listening style
•	 Listens passively, making no effort to
engage with the information heard
Listen Ethically •	 Clearly communicates listening expectations
•	 Is sensitive to and tolerant of differences
•	 Makes no effort to respond appropriately
to a speaker’s message
•	 Expects others to have the same beliefs,
values, and cultural expectations he or
she has
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 81 07/11/14 11:45 AM
82 Listening to Speeches
5.4
appropriateness, value, or importance of the information you hear. Related to
­
being a critical listener is being a critical thinker. Critical thinking is a mental
process of making judgments about the conclusions that are presented in what
you see, hear, and read. The goal of a critical listener or a critical thinker is to
evaluate information to make a choice. Whether you are listening to a political
candidate giving a persuasive presentation to get your vote, a radio announcer
extolling the virtues of a new herbal weight-loss pill, or someone asking you to
invest in a new technology company, your goal as a critical listener is to assess the
quality of the information and the validity of the conclusions that are presented.
We should emphasize that being a critical listener does not mean that you’re
looking only for what is wrong in what the speaker says; we’re not suggesting
that you listen to a speaker only to pounce on the message and the messenger
at the conclusion of the speech. Listen to identify what the speaker does that is
effective as well as to identify which conclusions don’t hold up. To be a rhetori-
cal critic is to evaluate the effectiveness and appropriateness of the message and
its delivery. The educator John Dewey penned a lasting description of criticism:
Criticism . . . is not fault-finding. It is not pointing out evils to be
reformed. It is judgment engaged in discriminating among values. It is
talking through as to what is better and worse . . . with some conscious-
ness of why the worse is worse.24
How does a critical listener do all this? Consider the following skills.
Separate Facts from Inferences
The ability to separate facts from inferences is a basic critical thinking and lis-
tening skill. Facts are information that has been proven true by direct observa-
tion. For example, it has been directly observed that water boils at 212 degrees
Fahrenheit and that the direction of the magnetic north pole can be found by
consulting a compass. An inference is a conclusion based on partial information
or an evaluation that has not been directly observed. You infer that your favor-
ite sports team will win the championship or that it will rain tomorrow. You
can also infer that if more Republicans than Democrats are elected to Congress,
the next president might be a Republican. But you can only know this for a fact
after the presidential election. Facts are in the realm of certainty; inferences are in
the realm of probability and opinion—where most arguments advanced by pub-
lic speakers reside. A critical listener knows that when a politician running for
office claims, “It’s a fact that my opponent is not qualified to be elected,” this
statement is not a fact; it is an inference.
Evaluate the Quality of Evidence
Evidence consists of the facts, examples, opinions, and statistics that a speaker
uses to support a conclusion. Researchers have documented that the key ele-
ments in swaying a jury are the quality and quantity of the evidence that is
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 82 07/11/14 11:45 AM
83
Listening and Critical Thinking 5.4
presented to support a case.25 Without credible supporting evidence, it would
not be wise to agree with a speaker’s conclusion.
What should you listen for when trying to decide whether evidence is cred-
ible? If, for example, a speaker says, “It’s a fact that this herbal weight-loss pill
helps people lose weight,” your job as a listener is to determine whether that
statement is actually a fact. Has it been proven with direct observation to be
true? The speaker has an obligation to provide evidence to support the state-
ment that has been asserted.
Some speakers will support a conclusion with examples. But if the exam-
ples aren’t typical, if only one or two examples are offered, or if other known
examples differ from the one the speaker is using, then you should question the
conclusion.
Another form of evidence that a speaker might use to convince you is an
opinion. Simply stated, an opinion is a quoted comment from someone. The best
opinions come from reliable, credible sources. What makes a source credible?
A credible source is someone who has the credentials, experience, and skill to
make an observation about the topic at hand. Listen for the source a speaker
cites when quoting an expert on a subject.
A fourth kind of evidence that is often used, especially with a skepti-
cal listener, is statistics. A statistic is a number that summarizes a collection of
examples. Some of the same kinds of questions that should be raised about other
forms of evidence should be raised about statistics: Are the statistics reliable,
unbiased, recent, representative, and valid?
Here, we have introduced you to the importance of listening for good evi-
dence. Because evidence is an important element of public speaking, we’ll pro-
vide more detailed information about how to use evidence when we discuss
using supporting material in Chapter 8 and using evidence to persuade in Chap-
ters 16 and 17.
Evaluate the Underlying Logic and Reasoning
An effective critical listener listens not only for evidence but also for the overall
structure of the logic, or argument, a speaker uses to reach a conclusion. Logic
is a formal system of rules applied to reach a rational conclusion. A speaker is
logical if he or she offers appropriate evidence to reach a valid, well-reasoned
conclusion. For example, Angela tried to convince her listeners to take the
weight-loss herb Slimlean by pointing out that many stores sell this diet prod-
uct, but that is not a strong logical framework for her conclusion. Just because
Slimlean is readily available does not mean that it’s effective and safe.
Reasoning is the process of drawing a conclusion from evidence within the
logical framework of the arguments. Can we reasonably conclude that anyone
can lose weight by taking Slimlean simply because the product is available in
many stores? The evidence very likely does not support this conclusion. When
a speaker is seeking to change your behavior, listen especially carefully to the
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 83 07/11/14 11:45 AM
84 Listening to Speeches
5.5
logic or structure of the arguments that are presented. Is the speaker trying to
convince you to do something by offering one or two specific examples? Or is
the speaker reaching a conclusion based on a fundamental principle such as “All
herbal diet medicine will cause you to lose weight”? The critical listener appro-
priately reviews the logic and reasoning used to reach a conclusion. When we
discuss reasoning fallacies in Chapter 17, we will elaborate on different types of
reasoning and identify several ways in which speakers misuse logic, reasoning,
and evidence.
You might reasonably suspect that a primary goal of a public-speaking
class would be to enhance your speaking skill, and you would be right. But in
addition to helping you to become a better speaker, a study of communication
principles and skills should also help you to become a better consumer of mes-
sages. Becoming a critical listener and thinker is an important benefit that you
will enjoy by learning about how messages are constructed. Researchers have
found that students who complete any communication course—debate, argu-
mentation, or public speaking—are likely to show improved critical thinking
ability. The introduction to critical listening and thinking skills presented here is
reinforced throughout the rest of the book by discussions of how to become an
audience-centered public speaker.
Quick Check
Critical Thinking and Listening
Separate facts from inferences:
•	 Facts can be proven.
•	 Inferences are based on partial or unobserved evidence.
Evaluate evidence:
•	 Facts
•	 Examples
•	 Opinions
•	 Statistics
Evaluate the logic and reasoning of conclusions.
Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches
5.5	 Use criteria to effectively and appropriately evaluate speeches.
Your critical thinking and listening skills will help you to evaluate not only the
speeches of others but also your own speeches. When you evaluate something,
you judge its value and appropriateness. To make a judgment about the value
5.5
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 84 07/11/14 11:45 AM
85
Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches 5.5
of something, it’s important to use criteria for what is and is not effective or
appropriate. Rhetorical criticism is the process of using a method or standards
to evaluate the effectiveness and appropriateness of messages. The term rheto-
ric has both classic and contemporary meanings.26 The ancient Greek scholar
Aristotle defined rhetoric as the ability to discover in any given case the ­
available
means of persuasion.27 Our more contemporary definition of rhetoric is the
­
process of using symbols to create meaning to achieve a goal. As a public
speaker, you are a rhetorician in that you are using symbols (words, images,
nonverbal cues) to create meaning in the minds of your listeners and achieve a
goal (to inform, to persuade, to entertain). A critic not only evaluates a message
but also helps to illuminate, or make better sense of the message.28
One important goal of studying public speaking is to help you be a better rhe-
torical critic of the many messages you hear every day. In our discussion of how
to analyze and evaluate speeches, we’ll first suggest criteria for evaluating mes-
sages and then offer specific strategies for sharing your evaluations with others.
Understanding Criteria for Evaluating Speeches
What makes a speech good? For more than 2,000 years, rhetorical scholars have
been debating this question. For example, the ancient Greek scholar, Isocrates,
believed that effective rhetoric should have the “qualities of fitness for the occa-
sion, propriety of style and originality of treatment.”29 However, our purpose
here is not to take you through the centuries of dialogue and debate about this
issue but to offer some practical ways to help you evaluate your own messages
as well as the messages of others.
Figure 5.2 lists key questions to use in evaluating any speech. The questions
reflect the audience-centered model of public speaking. Your public-speaking
teacher will probably have you use an evaluation form that lists the precise crite-
ria for evaluating speeches in your class.
Underlying any list of what a good speaker should do are two fundamental
goals: Any speech should be both effective and ethical. The mission of the National
Communication Association mirrors these two goals—to promote effective and
ethical communication. These two requirements can translate into general crite-
ria for evaluating speeches you give as well as those you hear.
THE MESSAGE SHOULD BE EFFECTIVE  To be effective, the message of a
speech should be understandable to listeners and should achieve its intended
purpose.30
IS THE MESSAGE UNDERSTOOD?  If listeners fail to comprehend the
­
speaker’s ideas, the speech fails. Even more difficult than saying something is
saying something that a listener understands. In this course, you’ll learn an array
of principles and strategies to help you develop a common understanding with
your audience. The process of communicating to be understood is anchored first
and foremost in considering the needs of your listeners. As you listen to speeches,
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 85 07/11/14 11:45 AM
86 Listening to Speeches
5.5
• Was the general purpose
(to inform, to persuade,
to entertain) clear?
• Was the specific purpose
appropriate for the
audience?
• Were the main ideas
clearly identified in
the introduction of
the speech,
developed in the
body of the speech,
and summarized in
the conclusion of the
speech?
• Was the central
idea clear
enough to be
summarized in
one sentence?
• Was the topic appropriate for
the audience, the occasion,
and the speaker?
• Was the speech narrowed to
fit the time limits?
• Did the speaker make appropriate eye
contact with the audience?
• Did the speaker use appropriate volume
and vocal variation?
• Did the speaker use gestures and posture
appropriately?
• Did the speaker use presentation aids that
were easy to see and handled effectively?
• Did the speaker use presentation aids
that were of high quality?
• Did the speech
sound as though
it was well
rehearsed?
• Did the speaker
seem familiar
with the speech
content?
• Did the speech have a clear
introduction that caught
attention, provided a preview of
the speech, and established the
speaker’s credibility?
• Did the speaker organize the body
of the speech in a logical way?
• Did the speaker use transitions,
summaries, and signposts to
clarify the organization?
• Did the speaker appropriately
summarize the major ideas and
provide closure to the speech
during the conclusion?
• Did the speaker use varied and interesting
supporting material?
• Did the speaker use effective and
appropriate evidence to support
conclusions?
• Did the speaker use credible supporting
material?
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Audience
Orientation
Did the speaker
make a specific
effort to adapt to
the audience?
Figure 5.2  Asking yourself these questions will help you to evaluate any speech.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 86 07/11/14 11:45 AM
87
Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches 5.5
a fundamental criterion for determining whether the message is a good one is
whether you understand the message.
DOES THE MESSAGE ACHIEVE ITS GOAL?  When you communicate with an
audience, you want to achieve a goal or accomplish something. Typical general
goals of public speaking are to inform, to persuade, and to entertain. The chal-
lenge in using this criterion in evaluating speeches is that you might not always
know the speaker’s true intent. Often, the best you can do is try to determine the
purpose by being a careful listener.
THE MESSAGE SHOULD BE ETHICAL  If a speaker’s message is clearly
understood by the audience and gets the reaction the speaker desired, but the
speaker has used unethical means to achieve the goal, the message may be an
effective message, but it is not an appropriate message. A good speaker is an ethical
speaker, one who tells the truth, gives credit for ideas and words where credit is
due, and doesn’t plagiarize.
You will probably speak to audiences that have a wide array of cultural back-
grounds. Regardless of their cultural tradition, each of your listeners holds an
underlying ethical code. Although, as we noted in Chapter 4, not all cultures have
the same ethical rules, many cultures adhere to precepts that, in essence, state the
value of being audience-centered by considering how other people would like to
be treated. An ethical public speaker focuses not only on achieving the goal of the
message but also on doing so while being sensitive and responsive to listeners.
Identifying and Analyzing Rhetorical Strategies
Rhetorical strategies are methods and techniques that speakers employ to
achieve their speaking goals. Recall that rhetoric is the use of symbols to achieve
goals. Symbols can be words, images (a flag, a cross, a six-pointed star), and
behaviors that create meaning for others. Whether you use them in an interview
to convince an employer to hire you for a job or hear them in a pop-up Inter-
net ad to persuade you to buy something, words and images that symbolically
inform and persuade are all around you. Public speakers are rhetoricians who
use symbols to achieve their goals.
One way to enhance your listening skills and become more mindfully aware
of how messages influence your behavior is to analyze the rhetorical strategies
a speaker is using. It’s especially important to be aware of how some speakers
may use unethical strategies—such as misusing evidence, relying too heavily on
emotion to persuade, or fabricating information—to deceive or manipulate you.
Rhetorician Robert Rowland suggests that, to analyze rhetorical messages,
listeners must be conscious of (1) the goal of the message, (2) its organiza-
tion, (3) the speaker’s role, (4) the overall tone of the message, (5) the intended
audience, and (6) the techniques the speaker uses to achieve the goal.31 Whether
it’s a speaker in your public-speaking class, the president delivering a State of
the Union address, a member of the clergy delivering a sermon, or a parent
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 87 07/11/14 11:45 AM
88 Listening to Speeches
5.5
addressing the school board, each speaker uses rhetorical strategies to achieve
a goal. The more clearly you can identify and analyze the speaker’s methods,
the more effectively you can assess whether the message and the messenger are
worthy of your support.
Giving Feedback to Others
As you enhance your skills of listening to messages and identifying the rhetori-
cal strategies a speaker uses, you may be asked to evaluate the speeches of other
people and provide feedback to them. You can use the speech evaluation criteria
in Figure 5.2 to help you evaluate others’ messages. Your instructor may provide
you with a speech evaluation form that will also help you to focus on and evalu-
ate essential elements of public speechmaking.
When you’re invited to critique your classmates’ speeches, your feedback
will be more effective if you keep some general principles in mind. Because
the word criticism means “to judge or discuss,” to criticize a speech is to dis-
cuss the speech—identifying both its strengths and those aspects that could be
improved. Effective criticism stems from developing a genuine interest in the
speaker rather than from seeking to find fault.
1.  Be descriptive. In a neutral way, describe what you saw the speaker doing.
Act as a mirror for the speaker to help him or her become aware of gestures
and other nonverbal signals of which he or she might not be aware. (If you are
watching a video recording of the speech together, you can help to point out
behaviors.) Avoid providing a list of only your likes and dislikes; describe what
you observe.
Effective:	
Stan, I noticed that about 50 percent of the time, you had
direct eye contact with your listeners.
Less Effective:	 Your eye contact was lousy.
2.  Be specific. When you describe what you see a speaker doing, make sure
your descriptions are precise enough to give the speaker a clear image of your
perceptions. Saying that a speaker had “poor delivery” doesn’t give him or her
much information—it’s only a general evaluative comment. Be as specific and
thoughtful as you can.
Effective:	
Dawn, your use of color on your overhead transparency
helped to keep my attention.
Less Effective:	 I liked your visuals.
3.  Be positive. Begin and end your feedback with positive comments. Begin-
ning with negative comments immediately puts the speaker on the defensive
and can create so much internal noise that he or she stops listening. Starting and
ending with positive comments will engender less defensiveness. Some teachers
call this approach the feedback sandwich. First, tell the speaker something that
you thought he or she did well. This will let the speaker know that you’re not an
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 88 07/11/14 11:45 AM
89
Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches 5.5
enemy who’s trying to shoot holes in his or her performance. Then share a sug-
gestion or two that could help the speaker to improve the presentation. End your
evaluation with another positive comment, or restate what you liked best about
the presentation.
Effective:	
Gabe, I thought your opening statistic was very effective in
catching my attention. You also maintained direct eye con-
tact when you delivered it. Your overall organizational pat-
tern would have been clearer to me if you had used more
signposts and transition statements. Or perhaps you could
use a visual aid to summarize the main points. You did a
good job of summarizing your three points in your conclu-
sion. I also liked the way you ended your speech by making
a reference to your opening statistics.
Less Effective:	
I got lost when you were in the body of your speech. I
couldn’t figure out what your major ideas were. I also didn’t
know when you made the transition between the introduc-
tion and the body of your speech. Your intro and conclusion
were good, but the organization of the speech was weak.
4.  Be constructive. Give the speaker some suggestions or alternatives for
improvement. It’s not especially helpful to rattle off a list of things you don’t like
without providing some suggestions for improvement. As a student of public
speaking, your comments should reflect your growing skill and sophistication in
the speechmaking process.
Effective:	
Jerry, I thought your speech had several good statistics and
examples that suggest you spent a lot of time in the library
researching your topic. I think you could add credibility to
your message if you shared your sources with the listener.
Your vocal quality was effective, and you had considerable
variation in your pitch and tone, but at times the speech rate
was a little fast for me. A slower rate would have helped me
catch some of the details of your message.
Less Effective:	 You spoke too fast. I had no idea whom you were quoting.
5.  Be sensitive. “Own” your feedback by using I-statements rather than you-
statements. An I-statement is a way of phrasing your feedback so that it is clear
that your comments reflect your personal point of view, such as “I wasn’t sure I
understood the key ideas you mentioned in your conclusion.” A you-statement,
such as “You didn’t summarize very well in your conclusion,” is a less sensitive
way of describing someone’s behavior by implying that the other person did
something wrong. Here’s another example:
Effective:	
Mark, I found myself so distracted by your gestures that I
had trouble focusing on the message.
Less Effective:	 Your gestures were distracting and awkward.
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 89 07/11/14 11:45 AM
90 Listening to Speeches
5.5
6.  Be realistic. Provide usable information. Provide feedback about aspects of
the presentation that the speaker can improve rather than about things he or she
cannot control. Maybe you have heard this advice: “Never try to teach a pig to
sing. It wastes your time. It doesn’t sound pretty. And it annoys the pig.” Saying
“You’re too short to be seen over the lectern,” “Your lisp doesn’t lend itself to public
speaking,” or “You looked nervous” is not constructive. Comments like these will
just annoy or frustrate the speaker because they refer to things the speaker can’t
do much to change. Concentrate on behaviors over which the speaker has control.
Effective:	
Taka, I thought your closing quote was effective in sum-
marizing your key ideas, but it didn’t end your speech on
an uplifting note. I can suggest another quote from Khalil
­
Gibran that would also summarize your key points and
provide a positive affirmation of your message. You may
want to try it if you give this speech again.
Less Effective:	 Your voice isn’t well suited to public speaking.
As you provide feedback, whether in your public-speaking class or to a
friend who asks you for a reaction to his or her speech, remember that the goal
of feedback is to offer descriptive and specific information that helps a speaker
to build confidence and skill.
Giving Feedback to Yourself
While you are collecting feedback from your instructor, classmates, family, and
friends, keep in mind that you are the most important critic of your speeches. The
goal of public-speaking instruction is to learn principles and skills that enable you
to be your own best critic. As you rehearse your speech, use self-talk to comment
about the choices you make as a speaker. After your speech, take time to reflect on
both the speech’s virtues and the areas for improvement in your speechmaking.
As an audience-centered speaker, you must learn to make changes on your feet,
in the middle of a speech. For example, if you find that your audience just
isn’t interested in the facts and statistics you are sharing, you may want to support
your points with a couple of stories instead. We encourage you to consider the fol-
lowing principles to enhance your own self-critiquing skills.
LOOK FOR AND REINFORCE YOUR SKILLS AND SPEAKING ABILITIES 
Try to recognize your strengths and skills as a public speaker. Note how your
audience analysis, organization, and delivery were effective in achieving your objec-
tives. Such positive reflection can reinforce the many skills you are learning in this
course. Resist the temptation to be too harsh or critical of your speaking skill.
EVALUATE YOUR EFFECTIVENESS ON THE BASIS OF YOUR SPECIFIC
SPEAKING SITUATION AND AUDIENCE  Throughout the book, we offer
many suggestions and tips for improving your speaking skill. We also stress,
however, that these prescriptions should be considered in light of your specific
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 90 07/11/14 11:45 AM
91
Analyzing and Evaluating Speeches 5.5
audience. Don’t be a slave to rules. If you are giving a pep talk to the Little
League team you are coaching, you might not have to construct an attention-
getting opening statement. Be flexible. Public speaking is an art as well as a
science. Give yourself permission to adapt principles and practices to specific
speech situations.
IDENTIFY ONE OR TWO AREAS FOR IMPROVEMENT  After each speaking
opportunity, identify what you did right; then give yourself a suggestion or two
for ways to improve. You may be tempted to overwhelm yourself with a long
list of things you need to do as a speaker. Rather than trying to work on a dozen
goals, concentrate on two or three or maybe even just one key skill you would
like to develop. To help you make your decision, keep in mind the audience-
centered model of public speaking.
Ultimately, the goal of this course is to teach you how to listen to your own
commentary and become your own expert in shaping and polishing your speak-
ing style.
Quick Check
Giving Good Feedback
Help your fellow speakers by making sure your evaluations are:
•	 Descriptive
•	 Specific
•	 Positive
•	 Constructive
•	 Sensitive
•	 Realistic
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 91 07/11/14 11:45 AM
92 CHAPTER 5 STUDY GUIDE
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
5.1	 Describe the five stages of listening.
Listening is a process that involves selecting, attending to, understanding,
remembering, and responding to messages.
Key Terms
Listening
Select
Attend
Understand
Remember
Respond
5.2	 List and describe five barriers to effective listening.
Barriers that keep people from listening at peak efficiency include information
overload, personal concerns, outside distractions, prejudice, and differences
­
between speech rate and thought rate.
Key Term
Working memory theory of listening
5.3	 Identify and implement strategies for becoming a better listener.
Listen to nonverbal messages with your eyes. Understand your listening style.
Listen mindfully, monitoring your emotional reactions to messages, and avoid
jumping to conclusions. Identify your listening goal and listen for major ideas.
Re-sort, restate, or repeat key messages. Be an ethical listener.
Key Terms
Listening styles
Relational-oriented listener
Task-oriented listener
Analytical listener
Critical listener
5.4	 Identify and implement strategies for improving your critical listening
and critical thinking skills.
Evaluate the speaker’s use of facts, examples, opinions, and statistics as
­
evidence. Examine the logic and reasoning leading to the speaker’s conclusions.
As a speaker, take care to use credible arguments and evidence.
Key Terms
Critical listening
Critical thinking
Facts
Inference
Evidence
Logic
Reasoning
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 92 07/11/14 11:45 AM
93
CHAPTER 5 STUDY GUIDE
5.5	 Use criteria to effectively and appropriately evaluate speeches.
A good speech is understandable to the audience and ethically achieves its
intended effect. When offering feedback to yourself or others, be descriptive,
specific, positive, constructive, sensitive, and realistic.
Key Terms
Rhetorical criticism
Rhetoric
Symbols
Rhetorical strategies
Think about These Questions
•	 For some reason, when Alberto hears the president speak, he just tunes out.
What are some of the barriers that may be keeping Alberto from focusing
on the message he is hearing? How might Alberto overcome those barriers?
•	 One of your instructors does nothing during lectures but read in a mono-
tone from old notes. What strategies can you use to increase your listening
effectiveness in this challenging situation?
•	 As an ethical listener, what can you do to be less distracted by the delivery
and emotional elements of a speaker’s message and more focused on the
substance or content of the message? Explain your answer.
•	 Janice was assigned the task of critiquing one of her classmate’s speeches.
Although she thought the speech was pretty good, she gave the speaker
low marks because she strongly disagreed with what the speaker was
saying. Was this an appropriate evaluation? Why or why not?
M05_BEEB3981_05_SE_C05_065-094.indd 93 07/11/14 11:45 AM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
95
Chapter 6
Analyzing Your
Audience
“For of the three
elements in
speechmaking—
speaker, subject,
and person
addressed—it
is the last one,
the hearer, that
determines the
speech’s end and
object.”
—Aristotle
	6.1	Becoming an Audience-Centered
Speaker
	6.2	Gathering Information about Your
Audience
Gathering Information Informally
Gathering Information Formally
	6.3	Analyzing Information about Your
Audience
Look for Audience Member
Similarities
Look for Audience Member
Differences
Establish Common Ground with
Your Audience
	6.4	Adapting to Your Audience
Outline
(continued)
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 95 11/17/14 12:08 PM
96 Analyzing Your Audience
6﻿
Learning Objectives
	6.1	List three steps in becoming an audience-centered speaker.
	6.2	Describe informal and formal methods of gathering information
about your audience.
	6.3	Explain how to analyze information about your audience.
	6.4	Identify and use strategies for adapting to your audience.
	6.5	Develop methods of analyzing your audience before you speak by
seeking demographic, psychological, and situational information
about your audience and the speaking occasion.
	6.6	Identify methods of assessing and adapting to your audience’s
reactions while your speech is in progress.
	6.7	Identify methods of assessing audience reactions after you have
concluded your speech.
It seemed harmless enough. Charles Williams was asked to speak to a Cub Scout
pack about his experience as a young cowboy in Texas. The boys were learning
to tie knots, and Williams, a retired rancher, could tell them how to make a lariat
and how to make and use other knots.
His speech started out well. He seemed to be adapting to his young audi-
ence. However, for some reason, Williams thought the boys might also enjoy
learning how to exterminate the screwworm, a pesky parasite of cattle. In the
middle of his talk about roping cattle, he launched into a presentation about the
techniques for sterilizing male screwworms. The parents in the audience fidg-
eted in their seats. The seven- and eight-year-olds didn’t have the foggiest idea
what a screwworm was, what sterilization was, or how male and female screw-
worms mate.
It got worse; his audience analysis skills deteriorated even more. Williams
next talked about castrating cattle. Twenty-five minutes later, he finally finished
	6.5	Analyzing Your Audience before You
Speak
Demographic Audience Analysis
Psychological Audience Analysis
Situational Audience Analysis
	6.6	Adapting to Your Audience as You
Speak
Identifying Nonverbal Audience
Cues
Responding to Nonverbal Cues
Strategies for Customizing Your
Message to Your Audience
	6.7	Analyzing Your Audience after You
Speak
Nonverbal Responses
Verbal Responses
Survey Responses
Behavioral Responses
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 96 11/17/14 12:08 PM
97
Becoming an Audience-Centered Speaker 6.1
the screwworm/castration speech. The parents were relieved. Fortunately, the
boys hadn’t understood it.
Williams’s downfall resulted from his failure to analyze his audience. He may
have had a clear objective in mind, but he hadn’t considered the background or
knowledge of his listeners. Audience analysis is essential for any successful speech.
Becoming an Audience-Centered
Speaker
6.1	 List three steps in becoming an audience-centered speaker.
In Chapter 1, we identified the key elements in communication: source, receiver,
message, and channel. All four elements are important, but perhaps the most im-
portant is the receiver. In public speaking, the receiver is the audience, and the
audience is the reason for a speech event. In Chapter 3, we presented a model that
provides an overview of the entire process of speech preparation and delivery; the
model is shown again in Figure 6.1. We reemphasize here the concept of public
speaking as an audience-centered activity that we stress in those chapters: At each
stage in crafting your speech, you must be mindful of your audience.
6.1
Figure 6.1  Audience analysis is central to the speechmaking
process.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main
Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select
and Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 97 11/17/14 12:08 PM
98 Analyzing Your Audience
6.2
When you think of your audience, don’t think of some undifferentiated
mass of people waiting to hear your message. Instead, think of individuals. Pub-
lic speaking is the process of speaking to a group of individuals, each with a
unique point of view. Your challenge as an audience-centered public speaker is
to find out as much as you can about these individuals. From your knowledge
of the individuals, you can then develop a general profile of your listeners. If
you are presenting your speech online or via video and you can’t literally see
your listeners, consider visualizing who your listeners are both before and dur-
ing your message preparation and presentation.
The How To box summarizes three key steps in becoming an audience-
centered public speaker. In this chapter, we’ll talk more about those three steps
in more detail and discuss the process of analyzing your audience before, dur-
ing, and after you speak. The audience-analysis skills and techniques that we
present in this chapter will help you throughout the entire public-speaking
process, as you select a topic, determine the purpose of your speech, develop
your central idea, generate main ideas, gather supporting material, firm up your
organization, rehearse, and deliver your speech.
Gathering Information about Your
Audience
6.2	 Describe informal and formal methods of gathering information about
your audience.
As an audience-centered speaker, you should try to find out as much as you can
about your audience before planning your speech. You might wonder, “How
do I go about gathering information about my audience?” There are two ap-
proaches you can take: an informal one and a formal one.
6.2
Become an Audience-Centered Speaker
	1.	
Gather information about your audience. You can gather some information informally, just
by observing your listeners or asking general questions about them. Or you can take a
more formal approach and administer a survey to obtain more specific information about
them.
	2.	
Analyze the information you have gathered. Categorize and evaluate what you have gath-
ered to determine your listeners’ psychological profile as well as to consider the occasion at
which you are speaking.
	3.	
Use your information to ethically adapt to your listeners. As our audience-centered model
­
illustrates, each decision that you make when designing and delivering your message
should consider the needs and backgrounds of your audience.
How
To
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 98 11/17/14 12:08 PM
99
Gathering Information about Your Audience 6.2
Gathering Information Informally
The simplest way to gather information about your audience members infor-
mally is just to observe them and ask questions before you speak. Informal
observations can be especially important in helping you to assess obvious dem­
ographic characteristics. Demographics are statistical information about char-
acteristics such as age, race, gender, sexual orientation, educational level, and
ideological or religious views of a population such as an audience. For example,
you can make some inferences from their appearance about how many members
of your audience are male or female, as well as about their ethnic or cultural
traits and approximate age.
If, for example, you were going to address a meeting of your local PTA about
a new business you were opening to help students and parents develop science
projects, you could attend a meeting before your speaking date. You might note
the general percentage of men and women in the audience and the ages of the
parents who attended. You could also ask whether most parents who show up
for PTA meetings are parents of elementary, middle-school, or high-school stu-
dents. Knowing these key pieces of information would help you to tailor your
speech so that it will address your listeners’ interests.
You could also talk with people who know something about the audience
you will be addressing. If you are invited to speak to a group you have not spo-
ken to before, ask the person who invited you some general questions about
the audience members: What is their average age? What are their political af-
filiations? What are their religious beliefs? What are their attitudes toward your
topic? Try to get as much information as possible about your audience before
you give your speech.
Gathering Information Formally
Rather than rely only on inferences drawn from casual observation and conver-
sations with others, you may, if time and resources permit, want to conduct a
more formal survey of your listeners. A survey allows you to gather both demo-
graphic information, as shown in Figure 6.2, and information about what audi-
ence members like or dislike, believe to be true or false, or think is good or bad
about the topic or issues you will discuss, as shown in Figure 6.3.
If your topic is the best approach to finding a rental apartment in your area,
for example, use demographic questions to find out how many members of your
audience own a home and how many are currently living in an apartment. You
might also ask how they found their current apartment, how many are now
searching for an apartment, and how many anticipate searching for one. An-
swers to these questions can give you useful information about your audience
and may also provide examples to use in your presentation. Whatever informa-
tion you want to gather, you will need to develop a carefully written survey or
questionnaire. We offer some survey writing tips in the How To box.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 99 11/17/14 12:08 PM
100 Analyzing Your Audience
6.2
Figure 6.2 Demographic Audience-Analysis Questionnaire. You can modify this
sample questionnaire according to your audience and topic.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
Demographic Audience-Analysis Questionnaire
1. Name (optional):
2. Sex: Male ■ Female ■
3. Occupation:
4. Religious affiliation:
5. Marital status: Married ■ Single ■ Divorced ■
6. Years of schooling beyond high school:
7. Major in college:
8. Annual income:
9. Age:
10. Ethnic background:
11. Hometown and state:
12. Political affiliation: Republican ■ Democrat ■ Other ■ None ■
13. Membership in professional or fraternal organizations:
Develop a Survey
	1.	
Decide what you want to know about your audience.  Let your topic and the speaking oc-
casion help you to determine the kinds of questions you should pose.
	2.	
Write your questions.  You can ask your potential audience straightforward questions about
such demographic information as age, sex, occupation, and memberships in professional
organizations, like those shown in Figure 6.2. To determine their attitudes, you can use the
two types of questions shown in Figure 6.3:
•	 Open-ended questions allow for unrestricted answers without limiting answers to
choices or alternatives. Use open-ended questions when you want more detailed
information from your audience.
•	 Closed-ended questions offer several alternatives from which to choose. They are
very useful when you want to tabulate statistics about your audience.
	3.	
Test your survey.  After you develop the questions, it is wise to test them on a small group
of people to make sure the questions are clear and will encourage meaningful answers.
	4.	
Administer your survey.  After you have made any needed changes to clarify your questions,
you are ready to ask audience members to respond to the survey. Instead of, or in addition
to, distributing a paper-and-pencil survey, you could use e-mail, send text messages, or
invite audience members to click on a Web site or Facebook page that you’ve designed.
Several companies offer free online survey capabilities. Just be sure to allow plenty of time
to analyze the responses before your speech.
How
To
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 100 11/17/14 12:08 PM
101
Analyzing Information about Your Audience 6.3
Analyzing Information about Your
Audience
6.3	 Explain how to analyze information about your audience.
Audience analysis is the process of examining information about the listeners
who will hear your speech. That analysis helps you to adapt your message so
that your listeners will respond as you wish. You analyze audiences every day
6.3
Figure 6.3  Sample Audience Attitude Survey
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
Open-Ended Questions
1. What are your feelings about having high-school health clinics dispense birth-control pills?
2. What are your reactions to the current rate of teenage pregnancy?
3. What would you do if you discovered your daughter was receiving birth-control pills from
her high-school health clinic?
Closed-Ended Questions
1. Are you in favor of school-based health clinics dispensing birth-control pills to high-school
students?
Yes ■ No ■
2. Birth-control pills should be given to high-school students who ask for them in school-based
health clinics. (Circle the statement that best describes your feeling.)
Agree strongly Agree Undecided Disagree Disagree strongly
3. Check the statement that most closely reflects your feelings about school-based health
clinics and birth-control pills.
■ Students should receive birth-control pills in school-based health clinics whenever
they want them, without their parents’ knowledge.
■ Students should receive birth-control pills in school-based health clinics whenever
they want them, as long as they have their parents’ permission.
■ I am not certain whether students should receive birth-control pills in school-based
health clinics.
■ Students should not receive birth-control pills in school-based health clinics.
4. Rank the following statements from most desirable (1) to least desirable (5).
Birth-control pills should be available to all high-school students in school-based
health clinics, whenever students want them, and even if their parents are not aware
that their daughters are taking the pills.
Birth-control pills should be available to all high-school students in school-based
health clinics, but only if their parents have given their permission.
Birth-control pills should be available to high-school students without their parents’
knowledge, but not in school-based health clinics.
Birth-control pills should be available to high-school students, but not in school-
based health clinics, and only with their parents’ permission.
Birth-control pills should not be available to high-school students.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 101 11/17/14 12:08 PM
102 Analyzing Your Audience
6.3
as you speak to others or join group conversations. For example, most of us do
not deliberately make offensive comments to family members or friends. Rather,
we analyze our audience (often very quickly), and then we adapt our messages
to the individuals with whom we are speaking. Public speaking involves the
same sort of process.
Precisely what do you look for when analyzing the information that you
have gathered about your audience? Ask yourself the following questions:
•	 How are audience members similar to one another?
•	 How are audience members different from one another?
•	 On the basis of their similarities and differences, how can I establish com-
mon ground with the audience?
Look for Audience Member Similarities
Knowing what several members of your audience have in common can help you
to craft a message that resonates with them. For example, if your audience mem-
bers are approximately the same age, then you have some basis for selecting
examples and illustrations that your listeners will understand. When looking for
similarities, consider the following questions: What ethnic and cultural charac-
teristics do audience members have in common? Are they all from the same geo-
graphic region? Do they (or did they) attend the same college or university? Do
they have similar levels of education? Do they all like the same kinds of things?
Answering these and other questions will help you to develop your own ideas
and relate your message to your listeners.
Look for Audience Member Differences
Besides noting similarities, you can also note differences among your audience
members. It is unlikely that all the audience members for the speeches you give
in class will have similar backgrounds. The range of cultural backgrounds, eth-
nic ties, and religious traditions among students at most colleges and universi-
ties is rapidly expanding. You can also note a range of differences in age and
gender as well as perspectives about your topic.
Establish Common Ground with Your Audience
When you know what your audience members have in common as well as how
they differ, both in terms of demographic information (such as age or educa-
tion level) and in terms of attitudes and beliefs they may have about you or
your topic, then you can seek to establish common ground with your audience.
To establish common ground with your audience is to identify ways in which
you and your listeners are alike. The more your listeners identify with you and
the goals of your message, the more likely they are to respond positively. Keep
in mind that although each audience member is unique, with his or her own
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 102 11/17/14 12:08 PM
103
Adapting to Your Audience 6.4
characteristics and preferences, you are looking for general ways in which they
are alike or different. Sometimes the only common ground you may find is that
both you and your listeners believe that the issue you are addressing is a serious
problem; you might have different views about the best solution. If, for exam-
ple, you were addressing a group of people who were mostly against increas-
ing taxes to pay teachers higher salaries but you were in favor of a tax increase,
you could establish common ground by noting that both you and your listeners
value education and want high-quality teachers in the classroom.
When you meet someone for the first time, you may spend time identify-
ing common ground: people you both know or places you’ve both visited. In
this way, you begin to establish a relationship with this person. A relationship
is an ongoing connection you have with another person. As a public speaker,
establish a relationship with your audience by identifying, from your audience
analysis, what you have in common with the listeners.
Quick Check
Analyzing Audience Information
Look for:
•	 Similarities among listeners
•	 Differences among listeners
•	 Common ground with listeners
Adapting to Your Audience
6.4	 Identify and use strategies for adapting to your audience.
Audience adaptation is the process of ethically using information you’ve gathered
when analyzing your audience to modify your message in a way that helps your
audience clearly understand your message and helps you achieve your speaking
objective. If you only analyze your audience but don’t use the information to cus-
tomize your message, the information that you’ve gathered will be of little value.
Using your skill to learn about your listeners and then to adapt to them can help you
to maintain your listeners’ attention and make them more receptive to your ideas.
Here’s an example of how analyzing and adapting to others works: Imagine
you live in an apartment complex that doesn’t allow pets without the landlord’s
approval. You see an adorable cocker spaniel puppy that you’d like to buy. In fact,
you’ve already named him Martin. Before you bring Martin home, however, you
need not only your landlord’s approval but also your roommate’s blessing.
When trying to convince your landlord, you say, “I’ve always paid the rent
on time and never caused a problem. I will also pay an extra security deposit if I
6.4
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 103 11/17/14 12:08 PM
104 Analyzing Your Audience
6.4
can have a dog in the apartment.” Your message to your roommate is, “No worries
about you getting stuck with taking care of Martin if I go out of town. My friend,
who also lives in our apartment complex, has agreed to care for him when I’m
away.” You had the same goal for each audience—approval for having a dog in your
apartment—but you customized your message, tailoring your appeal to each lis-
tener based on the listener’s interests and concerns. You adapted to your audience.
When you are speaking in public, you should use the same process. The
principle is simple yet powerful: An effective public speaker is audience-
centered. The key questions in Table 6.1 can help you to formulate an effective
approach to your audience.
Being audience-centered does not mean that you should tell your listeners only
what they want to hear or that you should fabricate information simply to please your
audience or achieve your goal. If you adapt to your audience by abandoning your
own values and sense of truth, then you will become an unethical speaker rather
than an audience-centered one. It was President Truman who pondered, “I won-
der how far Moses would have gone if he’d taken a poll in Egypt?”1 The audience-
centered speaker adjusts his or her topic, purpose, central idea, main ideas,
supporting materials, organization, and even delivery of the speech so as to
encourage the audience to listen to his or her ideas. The ethical speaker doesn’t
make up information jut to get what he or she wants. The goal is to make the
audience come away from the speaking situation if not persuaded, then at least
feeling thoughtful rather than offended or hostile.
In this overview of how to become an audience-centered speaker, we’ve
pointed out the importance of gathering information, analyzing it to establish
common ground, and then using the information to ethically adapt to your lis-
teners. Now we’ll discuss these ideas in more detail. You will want to gather and
analyze information and use it to adapt to your listeners at three stages of the
speechmaking process: before you speak, as you speak, and after you speak.
Table 6.1  Audience-Centered Adaptation
Consider Your Audience
•	 To whom am I speaking?
•	 What does my audience expect from me?
•	 What topic would be most suitable for my audience?
Consider Your Speech Goal
•	 What is my objective?
Consider Your Speech Content
•	 What kind of information should I share with my audience?
•	 How should I present the information to them?
•	 How can I gain and hold their attention?
•	 What kind of examples would work best?
Consider Your Delivery
•	 What language or linguistic differences do audience members have?
•	 What method of organizing information will be most effective?
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 104 11/17/14 12:08 PM
105
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
Analyzing Your Audience before You
Speak
6.5	 Develop methods of analyzing your audience before you speak by
seeking demographic, psychological, and situational information about
your audience and the speaking occasion.
Learning about your audience members’ backgrounds and attitudes can help
you to select a topic, define a purpose, develop an outline, and carry out virtu-
ally all other speech-related activities. You can gather and analyze three primary
types of information:
 1.	Demographic
 2.	Psychological
 3.	Situational
Demographic Audience Analysis
As we noted earlier, demographics are statistics on population ­
characteristics
such as age; gender; sexual orientation; culture, ethnicity, and race; group
­
membership; and socioeconomic status. Now let’s consider how demographic
audience analysis can help you to better understand and adapt to your
­
audience. Some demographics can be inferred just by looking at your listeners,
but if you are presenting your speech online or via video where you can’t see
your listeners, it’s especially important to do prespeech demographic analysis.
Age  Although you must use caution in generalizing from only one factor such
as age, information about the age of audience members can suggest the kinds
of examples, humor, illustrations, and other types of supporting ­
material to use
in your speech. Many students in your public-speaking class are probably in
their late teens or early twenties; some may be older. The younger students may
know the latest hip-hop performers or musicians, for example, but the older
ones might not be familiar with Wiz Khalifa, Lil Wayne, Drake, or Nicki Minaj. If
you are going to give a talk on music, you will have to explain who the perform-
ers are and describe or demonstrate their style if you want all the members of
your class to understand what you are talking about.
For centuries, adults have lamented that younger generations don’t seem to
share the values of the older generation. Two current researchers who have stud-
ied generational differences have found that different generations do, indeed,
hold differing assumptions about work, duty, and certain values. Table 6.2 sum-
marizes the values and generational characteristics of four generations: matures,
baby boomers, generation X, and millennials.2
What do these generational differences have to do with public speaking?
Over 2,000 years ago, Aristotle noted that a good speaker knows how to adapt to
6.5
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 105 11/17/14 12:08 PM
106 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
audiences of different age levels. Your credibility as a speaker—how positively
you are perceived by your audience—depends on your sensitivity to the ­
values
and assumptions of your listeners. Of course, the broad generalizations that
we’ve summarized here don’t apply across the board, but it’s wise to consider
how generational differences can affect how your message is interpreted.
Gender and Sexual Orientation  Josh began his speech by thanking
his predominantly female audience for taking time from their busy schedules to
attend his presentation on managing personal finances—not a bad way to begin
a talk. However, he continued by noting that their job responsibilities of raising
children, keeping their homes clean, and feeding their families were among the
most important tasks in America. Josh thought he was paying his audience a
compliment. He did not consider that today most women work outside the home
as well as in it. Many of his listeners were insulted—and many of them stopped
being listeners. How can you avoid Josh’s fate? Follow these suggestions.
Be Sensitive To Diversity  Sexual and gender orientations are not easily
sorted into exclusive either-or categories. Gender is the culturally constructed
and psychologically based perception of one’s self as feminine or masculine. We
­
develop our gender identities as a result of life experiences, including social learn-
ing from others, and our inherited personality and genetics. A person’s sex is de-
termined by biology, as reflected in his or her anatomy and reproductive system;
someone is born either male or female. Drawing conclusions about your audience
Table 6.2  Summary of Generational Characteristics
Generation Name Birth Years Typical Values and Characteristics
Matures 1925–1942 •	 Hard work
•	 Duty
•	 Sacrifice
•	 A sense of what is right
•	 Work fast
Baby Boomers 1943–1960 •	 Personal fulfillment and optimism
•	 Crusading causes
•	 Buy now, pay later
•	 Equal rights for all
•	 Work efficiently
Generation X 1961–1981 •	 Live with uncertainty
•	 Balance is important
•	 Live for today
•	 Save
•	 Every job is a contract
Millennials 1982–2002 •	 Close to parents
•	 Feel “special”
•	 Goal-oriented
•	 Team-oriented
•	 Focus on achievement
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 106 11/17/14 12:08 PM
107
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
based only on the biological sex profile of your listeners could lead you to adapt
to your listeners inappropriately. Your listeners might identify themselves as male
or female, transgender/transsexual, or intersex, for example, with sexual orienta-
tions that might include lesbian, gay, bisexual, questioning, or asexual.
Use Unbiased Language  Take time to educate yourself about what words,
phrases, or perspectives are likely to offend or create psychological noise for your
listeners. Think carefully about the implications of words or phrases you take for
granted. For example, many people still use the words ladies or matrons without
thinking about their connotations in U.S. culture. Sometimes we unintention-
ally offend someone through more subtle misuse of language. For example, gays
and lesbians typically prefer to be referred to as “gay” or “lesbian” rather than as
­“homosexual.” Be especially wary about jokes; many are derogatory to people who
identify as a particular sex, gender, or sexual orientation. Inappropriate language
and jokes may lower perceptions of your credibility among not only listeners who
are directly mentioned, but also among audience members who disdain bias.
Make Your Language and Your Message Inclusive  If you are
speaking to a mixed audience, make sure that your speech relates to all your
listeners, not just to one gender or orientation. If you decided to discuss breast
cancer, for example, you could note that men, too, can be victims of breast cancer
and that the lives of husbands, fathers, and brothers of patients are affected by
the disease. Many of the men in Josh’s audience were the ones who took a prime
role in caring for their children, and Josh’s opening did not relate to them.
Avoid Stereotypes  No matter what the gender mix in your audience, you
don’t want to make judgments based on gender stereotypes, as Josh did. Also be
cautious about assuming that men and women will respond differently to your
message. For example, contemporary research suggests there is no major differ-
ence between men and women in their susceptibility to persuasive messages.3
Moreover, although some research suggests that women are socialized to be
more emotional and empathic than men, other evidence suggests that men can
be equally sensitive.4 It is clear there are learned sex and gender differences in
language usage and nonverbal behavior, but we caution against making sweep-
ing gender- or sex-based assumptions about your audience. Furthermore, it is
not appropriate to single out gays and lesbians as separate categories of people
who are assumed to hold political, ideological, or religious views that are consist-
ently different from those of straight people.
People evaluate credibility by behavior, not by intentions. Monitor your lan-
guage choice and use of illustrations and humor so that you don’t alienate mem-
bers of your audience.5
Culture, Ethnicity, and Race  Culture is a learned system of knowledge,
behavior, attitudes, beliefs, values, and norms shared by a group of people. Eth-
nicity is that portion of a person’s cultural background that relates to a national or
religious heritage. A person’s race is his or her biological heritage—for example,
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 107 11/17/14 12:08 PM
108 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
Caucasian or Latino/Latina. One geneticist, however, has concluded that there is
much more variation within any given racial category than between one race and
another.6 So the term race is less accurate in attempting to describe a group of
people than the term ethnicity, which, as we noted, is based on more factors than
just biological heritage or genetics alone. The culture, ethnic, or racial background
of your audience influences the way they perceive your message. An effective
speaker adapts to differences in culture, race, and ethnicity.
As you approach any public-speaking situation, avoid an ethnocentric
mind-set. Ethnocentrism is an assumption that your own cultural approaches
are superior to those of other cultures. The audience-centered speaker is sensi-
tive to cultural differences and avoids saying things that would disparage the
cultural backgrounds of the audience.
You need not have international students in your class to have a culturally di-
verse audience. Different ethnic and cultural traditions thrive among people who
have lived in the United States all their lives. Students from a Polish family in Chi-
cago, a German family in Texas, and a Haitian family in Brooklyn all may be native
U.S. citizens and still have cultural traditions different from your own. Effective public
speakers seek to learn as much as possible about the cultural values and knowledge
of their audience so that they can understand the best way to deliver their message.
Researchers classify or describe cultural differences along several lines.7 As
shown in Table 6.3, understanding these classifications can provide clues to help
you adapt your message when you speak before diverse audiences.
Group Membership  It’s said that we are all members of a gang—it’s just
that some gangs are more socially acceptable than others. We are social crea-
tures; we congregate in groups to gain an identity, to help accomplish projects
we support, and to have fun. So it’s reasonable to assume that many of your
listeners belong to groups, clubs, or organizations. One way to gather informa-
tion about a specific group you are going to speak to is to see if the group or or-
ganization has a Web site or Facebook or other social media presence. Knowing
something about the history, purpose, values, and accomplishments of a group
can help you customize your message.
Religious Groups  As a follower of Scientology, Marsha believes that the
philosophy outlined in Dianetics (the book that is the basis of Scientology) is as
important as the religious precepts in the Bible. Planning to speak about Scientol-
ogy to a Bible-belt college audience, many of whose members view Scientology
as a cult, Marsha would be wise to consider how her listeners will respond to her
message. This is not to suggest that she should refuse the speaking invitation. She
should, however, be aware of her audience’s religious beliefs as she prepares and
presents her speech. When touching on religious beliefs or an audience’s values,
use great care in what you say and how you say it. Remind yourself that some
members of your audience will undoubtedly not share your beliefs and that few
beliefs are held as intensely as religious ones. If you do not wish to offend your
listeners, plan and deliver your speech with much thought and sensitivity.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 108 11/17/14 12:08 PM
109
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
Political Groups  Are members of your audience active in politics? Know-
ing whether your listeners are active in such groups as the Young Republicans,
Young Democrats, or Young Libertarians can help you to address political topics.
Members of environmental or other special-interest groups may also hold strong
political opinions on various topics and political candidates.
Table 6.3  Describing and Adapting to Cultural Differences
Cultural Value Cultural Characteristic How to Adapt to Cultural Characteristic
Individualistic cultures Individual achievement is emphasized more
than group achievement.
•	 Stress the importance of individual rewards and
recognition.
•	 Identify how audience members will benefit from
your ideas or proposal.
Collectivistic cultures Group or team achievement is emphasized
more than individual achievement.
•	 Recognize group or team accomplishments. Avoid
singling out individuals.
•	 Stress the importance of community values.
•	 Help audience members to be perceived in a posi-
tive way for helping others.
High-context cultures The context of a message—including
nonverbal cues, tone of voice, posture, and
facial expression—is often more important
than the words.
•	 Don’t boast about your specific accomplishments.
Establish credibility in more indirect ways.
•	 Use a subtle, less dramatic delivery style.
Low-context cultures The words in a message are given more
attention than the surrounding context.
•	 Be sure to make your ideas and recommendations
explicit.
•	 Although context cues from your delivery are impor-
tant, use your words to clearly convey the details of
your message.
Need for certainty People dislike ambiguous messages and
want specifics.
•	 Create a clear, logical organizational pattern for your
speech.
•	 Provide an explicit statement of your purpose.
•	 Use concrete details and examples.
•	 Explain action steps the audience can take.
Tolerance of
uncertainty
People can accept ambiguity and are not
bothered if they do not know all the details.
•	 The purpose of the speech need not be as explicitly
explained.
•	 You can use less specificity when suggesting solu-
tions to problems.
High-power cultures Status and power differences are
emphasized; roles and chains of command
are clearly defined.
•	 Convey the status or position of you or your sources
to help establish credibility.
•	 Develop messages or propose solutions that ac-
knowledge differences in status among people.
Low-power cultures Status and power differences receive less
emphasis; people strive for equality rather
than exalting those in positions of leadership.
•	 Discuss shared approaches to governance and
leadership.
•	 Develop solutions that involve others in reaching
consensus.
Long-term time
orientation
People accept that it may take a long time to
accomplish goals; patience, persistence, and
deferred gratification are valued.
•	 Appeal to listeners’ persistence, patience, and
delayed gratification.
•	 Emphasize how ideas and suggestions will benefit
future generations.
Short-term time
orientation
People are attuned to time and time
management; quick responses to problems
are valued.
•	 Explain actions and results that listeners can imple-
ment right now.
•	 Identify the immediate impact that your ideas and
proposals will have on listeners.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 109 11/17/14 12:08 PM
110 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
Work Groups  Most professions give rise to organizations or associations
to which professional people can belong. If you are speaking to an audience of
professionals, it’s important to be aware of professional organizations to which
they may belong (there may be several) and to know, for example, whether such
organizations have taken formal stands that may influence audience members’
views on certain issues. Work groups also may use abbreviations or acronyms
that can be useful to know. Your communication instructor, for example, may be
a member of the National Communication Association (NCA) and may belong
to a specific division of the NCA, such as the IDD (Instructional Development
Division).
Social Groups  Some groups exist just so that people can get together and
enjoy a common activity. Book clubs, film clubs, cycling clubs, cooking groups,
dancing groups, and bowling teams exist to bring people with similar ideas of
fun together to enjoy the activity. Knowing whether members of your audience
belong to such groups can help you to adapt your topic to them or, if you are
involved in similar groups, to establish common ground with them.
Service Groups  Many people are actively involved in groups that empha-
size community service as their primary mission. If you are speaking to a service
group such as the Lions Club or the Kiwanis Club, you can reasonably assume
that your listeners value community service and will be interested in how to
make their community a better place.
Learn about and adapt to your listeners’ memberships in religious, political, work, social, and service groups.
Socioeconomic Status  Socioeconomic status is a person’s perceived
importance and influence based on such factors as income, occupation, and
education level. In Europe, Asia, the Middle East, and other parts of the
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 110 11/17/14 12:08 PM
111
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
world, centuries-old traditions of acknowledging status differences still are
important today. Status differences exist in the United States but are often
more subtle. Having an idea about audience members’ incomes, occupations,
and education levels can be helpful as you develop a message that connects
with listeners.
Income  Having some general idea of the
income level of your listeners can be of great
value to you as a speaker. For example, if you
know that most audience members are strug-
gling to meet weekly expenses, it is unwise to talk about how to see the cultural
riches of Europe by traveling first class. But a speech about how to get paid to
travel to Europe by serving as a courier could hold considerable interest.
Occupation  Knowing what people do
for a living can give you useful information
about how to adapt your message to them.
Speaking to teachers, you will want to use
different examples and illustrations than
you would if you were speaking to ­
lawyers,
­
ministers, or automobile assembly-line
­
workers. Many college-age students have
jobs but don’t yet hold the jobs they aspire
to after they graduate from college. ­
Knowing
their career plans can help you to adjust your topic and supporting material to
your ­
listeners’ professional goals.
Education  About 30 percent of Ameri-
can adults obtain a college diploma. Slight-
ly more than 10 percent of the population
earns graduate degrees.8 The educational
background of your listeners is yet another
component of socioeconomic status that can
help you to plan your message. For exam-
ple, you have a good idea that your class-
mates in your college-level public-speaking class value education, because
they are striving, often at great sacrifice, to advance their education. Knowing
the educational background of your audience can help you to make decisions
about your choice of vocabulary, your language style, and your use of exam-
ples and illustrations.
Adapting To Diverse Listeners  The most recent U.S. census figures
document what you already know from your own life experiences: We all live in
an age of diversity. For example:
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 111 11/17/14 12:08 PM
112 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
•	 Virtually every state in the United States has experienced a dramatic in-
crease in foreign-born residents. Two-thirds of emigrants worldwide come
to the United States.9 Partly due to immigration, it is estimated that more
than 40 million U.S. residents speak something other than English as their
first language, including 18 million people whose first language is Spanish.10
•	 During the past decade in the United States, the combined population of
African Americans, Native Americans, Asians, Pacific Islanders, and
Hispanics grew thirteen times faster than the non-Hispanic white popula-
tion,11 andoneinsevenmarriagesoccursbetweenspousesofdifferentracesor
ethnicities.12 If trends continue, the U.S. Census Bureau predicts that in
about three decades, the United States will become a “majority-minority”
nation, with no single ethnic group making up a majority of the population.13
These trends translate to increased diversity in all aspects of society, in-
cluding most audiences you’ll face—whether in business, at school-board
meetings, or in your college classes. Diversity simply means differences. It’s
important to remember that diversity involves factors beyond ethnic and
cultural differences; each topic that we’ve reviewed when discussing demo-
graphic and psychological aspects of an audience contributes to overall audi-
ence diversity.
The question or challenge for a public speaker is “How do I adapt to listen-
ers with such different backgrounds and experiences?” We offer several general
strategies. You could decide to focus on a target audience, consciously use a va-
riety of methods of adapting to listeners, seek common ground, or consider us-
ing powerful visual images to present your key points.
Focus on a Target Audience A target audience is a specific segment
of your audience that you most want to address or influence. You’ve undoubt-
edly been a target of skilled communicators and might not have been aware that
messages had been tailored just for you. For example, you probably received
recruitment literature in your mail and email during your high-school years, en-
couraging you to apply to various colleges and universities. But not every stu-
dent in the United States receives brochures from the same colleges. Colleges and
universities targeted you on the basis of your test scores, your interests, where
you live, and your involvement in school-sponsored or extracurricular activities.
Likewise, as a public speaker, you might want to think about the portion of your
audience that you most want to understand or be convinced of your message.
The challenge in consciously focusing on a target audience is not to lose or
alienate the rest of your listeners—to keep the entire audience in mind while si-
multaneously making a specific attempt to hit your target segment. For example,
Sasha was trying to convince his listeners to invest in the stock market instead of
relying on the Social Security system. He wisely decided to focus on the younger
listeners; those approaching retirement age have already made their major in-
vestment decisions. Although he focused on the younger members of his audi-
ence, Sasha didn’t forget the mature listeners. He suggested that older listeners
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 112 11/17/14 12:08 PM
113
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
encourage their children or grandchildren to consider his proposal. He focused
on a target audience but didn’t ignore others.
Use Diverse Strategies for a Diverse Audience  Another approach
you can adopt, either separately or in combination with a target audience focus, is
to use a variety of strategies to reflect the diversity of your audience. On the basis of
your efforts to gather information about your audience, you should know the vari-
ous constituencies that will likely be present for your talk. The How To box describes
several methods you can use to reach the different listeners in your audience.
Identify Common Values  People have debated for a long time whether
there are universal human values. Several scholars have made strong arguments
that common human values do exist. Communication researcher David Kale
suggests that all people can identify with the individual struggle to enhance
one’s own dignity and worth, although different cultures express that in differ-
ent ways.14 A second common value is the search for a world at peace. Under-
lying that quest is a fundamental desire for equilibrium, balance, and stability.
Although there may always be a small but corrosive minority of people whose
actions do not support the universal value of peace, the prevailing human values
in most cultures ultimately do support peace.
Cultural anthropologists specialize in the study of behavior that is com-
mon to all humans. Cultural anthropologist Donald Brown has compiled a list of
hundreds of “surface” universals of beliefs, emotions, or behavior. According to
Brown, people in all cultures:15
•	 Have beliefs about death.
•	 Have a childhood fear of strangers.
•	 Have a division of labor by sex.
•	 Experience certain emotions and feelings, such as envy, pain, jealousy,
shame, and pride.
Use Diverse Strategies
These strategies can help you to reach a majority of the people in a diverse audience:
•	 Use a variety of types of supporting materials.  If you’re very uncertain about cultural preferences,
use a balance of both logical support (statistics, facts, specific examples) and emotional sup-
port (stories and illustrations).
•	 Remember the power of stories.  People from most cultures appreciate a good story. And
some people, such as those from Asian and Middle Eastern cultures, prefer hearing stories
and parables used to make a point or support an argument rather than facts and statistics.
•	 Add visual support.  Consider showing the audience an outline of your key ideas using
PowerPointTM or PreziTM. If there is a language barrier between you and your audience, being
able to read portions of your speech as they hear you speaking may improve audience
members’ comprehension. If an interpreter is translating your message, an outline can also
help to ensure that your interpreter will communicate your message accurately.
How
To
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 113 11/17/14 12:08 PM
114 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
•	 Use facial expressions to express emotions.
•	 Have rules for etiquette.
•	 Experience empathy.
•	 Value some degree of collaboration or cooperation.
•	 Experience conflict and seek to manage or mediate it.
Of course, not all cultures have the same beliefs about death or the same way
of dividing up labor, but people in all cultures address these issues.
Intercultural communication scholars Larry Samovar and Richard Porter
suggest other commonalities among people from all cultures. They propose that
all humans seek physical as well as emotional and psychological pleasure and
confirmation and seek to avoid personal harm.16 Although each culture defines
what constitutes pleasure and pain, it may be useful to interpret human behav-
ior with these general assumptions in mind. People also realize that their bio-
logical lives will end, that to some degree each person is isolated from all other
human beings, that we each make choices, and that each person seeks to give life
meaning. These similarities offer some basis for developing common messages
with universal meaning.
Identifying common cultural issues and similarities can help you to estab-
lish common ground with your audience. If you are speaking about an issue on
which you and your audience have widely different views, identifying a larger
common value that is relevant to your topic (such as the importance of peace,
prosperity, or family) can help you to find a foothold so that your audience will
at least listen to your ideas.
Rely on Visual Materials That Transcend Language Differences 
Pictures and other images can communicate universal messages—especially
emotional ones. Although there is no universal language, most listeners, regard-
less of culture and language, can comprehend visible expressions of pain, joy,
sorrow, and happiness. An image of a mother holding the frail, malnourished
body of her dying child communicates the ravages of famine without elaborate
verbal explanations. The more varied your listeners’ cultural experiences, the
more effective it can be to use visual materials to illustrate your ideas.
Quick Check
Adapting to Diverse Listeners
•	 Focus on a target audience without losing or alienating the rest of your listeners.
•	 Use diverse supporting materials that reflect a balance of logical and emotional
support.
•	 Use visual aids.
•	 Appeal to such common values as peace, prosperity, and family.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 114 11/17/14 12:08 PM
115
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
Psychological Audience Analysis
Demographic information lets you make some useful inferences about your au-
dience and predict likely responses. Learning how the members of your audi-
ence feel about your topic and purpose can provide specific clues about possible
reactions. A psychological audience analysis explores an audience’s attitudes
toward a topic, purpose, and speaker while probing the underlying beliefs and
values that might affect these attitudes. Learning how the members of your au-
dience feel about your topic and purpose may provide specific clues to help you
anticipate their reactions to your presentation.
Understanding Attitudes, Beliefs, and Values An attitude reflects
likes or dislikes. Do you like health food? Are you for or against capital pun-
ishment? Should movies be censored? What are your views on nuclear energy?
Your answers to these widely varied questions reflect your attitudes.
A belief is what you hold to be true or false. If you think the sun will rise
in the east in the morning, you hold a belief about the sun based on what you
perceive to be true or false.
A value is an enduring concept of good and bad, right and wrong. More
deeply ingrained than either attitudes or beliefs, values are therefore more resis-
tant to change. Values support both attitudes and beliefs. For example, you like
health food because you believe that natural products are more healthful. And you
value good health. You are against capital punishment because you believe that it is
wrong to kill people. You value human life. As with beliefs, a speaker who has some
understanding of an audience’s values is better able to adapt a speech to them.
Analyzing Attitudes Toward A Topic  It is useful to know how mem-
bers of an audience feel about your topic. Are they interested or apathetic? How
much do they already know about the topic? If the topic is controversial, are
they for it or against it? Knowing the answers to these questions from the outset
lets you adjust your message accordingly. For example, if you plan to talk about
increasing taxes to improve education in your state, you probably want to know
how your listeners feel about taxes and education.
When you are analyzing your audience, it may help to categorize the group
along three dimensions: interested—uninterested, favorable—unfavorable, and
captive—voluntary, as summarized in Table 6.4. With an interested audience,
your task is simply to hold and amplify interest throughout the speech. If your
audience is uninterested, you need to find ways to “hook” the members. Given
our visually oriented culture, consider using visual aids to gain and maintain
the attention of apathetic listeners.
You may also want to gauge how favorable or unfavorable your audience is
likely to feel toward you and your message before you begin to speak. Some
audiences, of course, are neutral, apathetic, or simply uninformed about what
you plan to say. Even if your objective is simply to inform, it is useful to know
whether your audience is predisposed to respond positively or negatively
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 115 11/17/14 12:08 PM
116 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
­
toward you or your message. Giving an informative talk about classical ­
music
would be quite challenging, for example, if you were addressing an audience
full of die-hard punk-rock fans. You might decide to show the connections
­
between classical music and punk rock to arouse their interest.
Your Speech Class as Audience  You might think that your public-
speaking class is not a typical audience because class members are required to
attend. Your speech class is a captive audience rather than a voluntary one. A cap-
tive audience has externally imposed reasons for being there (such as a require-
ment to attend class). Because class members must show up to earn credit for
class, you need not worry that they will get up and leave during your speech.
However, your classroom speeches are still real speeches. Your class members
are certainly real people with likes, dislikes, beliefs, and values.
Your classroom speeches should connect with your listeners so that they for-
get they are required to be in the audience. Class members should listen because
your message has given them new and useful information, touched them emo-
tionally, or persuaded them to change their opinion or behavior in support of
your position.
You will undoubtedly give other speeches to other captive audiences. Au-
diences at work or at professional meetings are often captive in the sense that
they may be required to attend lectures or presentations to receive continuing-
education credit or as part of their job duties. Your goal with a captive audience
is the same as with other types of audiences. You should make your speech just
as interesting and effective as one designed for a voluntary audience. You still
have an obligation to address your listeners’ needs and interests and to keep
them engaged in what you have to say.
Table 6.4  Adapting Your Message to Different Types of Audiences
Type of Audience Example How to Be Audience-Centered
Interested Mayors who attend a talk by the governor
about increasing security and reducing
the threat of terrorism
Acknowledge audience interest early in your speech; use the
interest they have in you and your topic to gain and maintain
their attention.
Uninterested Middle-school students attending a
lecture about retirement benefits
Make it a high priority to tell your listeners why your message
should be of interest to them.
Favorable A religious group that meets to hear a
speech about the importance of their
beliefs
Use the audience’s initial positive attitude to move them
even closer to your speaking goal; explicitly tell them in your
speech conclusion what you would like them to do.
Unfavorable Students who attend a lecture by the
university president explaining big
upcoming tuition increases
Be realistic in what you expect to accomplish; acknowledge
their opposing point of view; consider using facts to refute
misperceptions they may hold.
Voluntary Parents attending a lecture by the new
principal at their children’s school
Anticipate why they are coming to hear you, and speak about
the issues they want you to address.
Captive Students in a public-speaking class Find out who will be in your audience, and use this
knowledge to adapt your message to them.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 116 11/17/14 12:08 PM
117
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
Analyzing Attitudes Toward You, The Speaker  Audience mem-
bers’ attitude toward you in your role as speaker is another factor that can
influence their reaction to your speech. Regardless of how they feel about
your topic or purpose, if members of an audience regard you as credible,
they will be much more likely to be interested in, and supportive of, what
you have to say.
Your credibility—other people’s perception of you as trustworthy, knowl-
edgeable, and interesting—is one of the main factors that will shape your audi-
ence’s attitude toward you. If you establish your credibility before you begin to
discuss your topic, your listeners will be more likely to believe what you say and
to perceive you as dynamic.
For example, when a high-school health teacher asks a former drug addict
to speak to a class about the dangers of cocaine addiction, the teacher recog-
nizes that the speaker’s experiences make him credible and that his message
will be far more convincing than if the teacher just lectured on the perils of
cocaine use.
An audience’s positive attitude toward a speaker can overcome negative
or apathetic attitudes they may have toward the speaker’s topic or purpose. If
your analysis reveals that your audience does not recognize you as an authority
on your subject, you will need to build your credibility into the speech. If you
have had personal experience with your topic, be sure to let the audience know.
You will gain credibility instantly. In Chapters 10 and 17, we provide additional
strategies for enhancing your credibility.
Situational Audience Analysis
So far, we have concentrated on the people who will be your listeners as the
primary focus of being an audience-centered speaker. You should also con-
sider your speaking situation. Situational audience analysis includes an ex-
amination of the time and place of your speech, the size of your audience,
and the speaking occasion. Although these elements are not technically char-
acteristics of the audience, they can have a major effect on how your listeners
respond to you.
Time  You may have no control over when you will be speaking, but in design-
ing and delivering a talk, a skilled public speaker considers the time of day as
well as audience expectations about the speech length. If you are speaking to
a group of exhausted parents during a midweek evening meeting of the band-
boosters club, you can bet they will appreciate a direct, to-the-point presentation
more than a long oration. If you are on a program with other speakers, speaking
first or last on the program carries a slight edge, because people tend to remem-
ber what comes first or last. Speaking early in the morning when people might
not be quite awake, after lunch when they might feel a bit drowsy, or late in the
afternoon when they are tired may mean that you’ll have to strive consciously
for a more energetic delivery to keep your listeners’ attention.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 117 11/17/14 12:08 PM
118 Analyzing Your Audience
6.5
Also be mindful of your time limits. If your audience expects you to speak
for twenty minutes, it is usually better to end right at twenty minutes or even
a little earlier; most North Americans don’t appreciate being kept overtime for
a speech. In your public-speaking class, you will be given time limits, and you
might wonder whether you will encounter such strict time-limit expectations
outside of public-speaking class. The answer is a most definite yes. Whether it’s
a business presentation or a speech to the city council or school board, time lim-
its are often strictly enforced.
Size of Audience  The size of your audience directly affects speaking style
and audience expectations about delivery. As a general rule, the larger the audi-
ence, the more likely they are to expect a relatively formal style. With an audi-
ence of ten or fewer, you can punctuate a very conversational style by taking
questions from your listeners. If you and your listeners are so few that you can
be seated around a table, they may expect you to stay seated for your presenta-
tion. Many business “speeches” are given around a conference table.
A group of between twenty and thirty people—the size of most public-
speaking classes—will expect more formality than will an audience of a dozen
or fewer. Your speaking style can still be conversational, but your speech should
be appropriately structured and well organized; your delivery may include
more expansive gestures than you would display during a one-on-one chat with
a friend or colleague.
Audiences that fill a lecture hall will still appreciate a direct, conversational
style, but your gestures may increase in size, and if your voice will be unamplified,
you will be expected to speak with enough volume and intensity that people in
the last row can hear you. You may need to amplify your voice with a microphone.
Location  In your speech class, you have the advantage of knowing what
the room looks like, but in a new speaking situation, you might not have that
advantage. If at all possible, visit the place where you will speak to examine the
physical setting and find out, for example, how far the audience will be from the
lectern. Physical conditions such as room temperature and lighting can ­
affect
your performance, audience response, and the overall success of the speech.
Room arrangement and decor can also affect the way an audience responds.
If your speaking environment is less than ideal, you might need to work
especially hard to hold your audience’s attention. Although you probably will
not be able to make major changes in the speaking environment, it is ultimately
up to you to obtain the best speaking environment you can. The arrangement
of chairs, placement of audiovisual materials, and opening or closing of drapes
should all be under your control.
Occasion  Another important way to gain clues about your listeners is to
consider the reason this audience is here. What occasion brings this audience
together? The mind-set of people who have gathered for a funeral will obviously
be different from that of people who have asked you to say a few words after a
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 118 11/17/14 12:08 PM
119
Analyzing Your Audience before You Speak 6.5
banquet. Knowing the occasion helps you to predict both demographic charac-
teristics of the audience and the members’ psychological state of mind.
If you’re presenting a speech at an annual or monthly meeting, you have
the advantage of being able to ask people who have attended previous presenta-
tions what kind of audience typically gathers for the occasion. Your best source
of information may be either the person who invited you to speak or someone
who has attended similar events. Knowing when you will speak on the program
or whether a meal will be served before or after you talk will help you to gauge
what your audience expects from you.
Advance preparation will help you avoid last-minute surprises about the
speaking environment and the physical arrangements for your speech. A well-
prepared speaker adapts his or her message not only to the audience but also to
the speaking environment. Ask the following questions, and use the answers to
guide you in adapting your presentation to the speaking situation:
•	 How many people are expected to attend the speech?
•	 What is the occasion that brings the audience together?
•	 At what time of day will I be speaking and where will I appear on the
program?
•	 What are the length limitations on my talk? Does the total allotted time in-
clude time for a question-and-answer session?
•	 How will the audience seating be arranged? Can I rearrange the seats?
•	 How close will I be to the audience?
•	 Will I speak from a lectern?
•	 Will I be expected to use a microphone?
•	 Will I have adequate equipment for my visual aids? Is there anyone avail-
able to help me with sound and visual equipment?
•	 What is the room lighting like? Will the audience seating area be darkened
beyond a lighted stage? Can I control any aspects of the room lighting?
•	 Will there be noises or other distractions outside the room?
Quick Check
The Speaking Situation
Learn all you can about:
•	 The timing of your speech
•	 The place you’ll be speaking
•	 The size and placement of the audience
•	 The speaking occasion
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 119 11/17/14 12:08 PM
120 Analyzing Your Audience
6.6
Keep in mind that when you arrive to give your speech, you can make
changes in the previous speaker’s room arrangements. For example, the
­
purpose of the speaker immediately before Yue Hong was to generate interest
in a ­
memorial for Asian Americans who had fought in Vietnam. Because the
previous speaker wanted to make sure the audience felt free to ask questions,
the chairs were arranged in a semicircle, and the lights were turned on. But Yue
Hong was giving a more formal presentation on the future of the Vietnamese
population, which included a brief slide show. So when the preceding speaker
had finished, Yue Hong rearranged the chairs and darkened the room.
Adapting to Your Audience as You
Speak
6.6	 Identify methods of assessing and adapting to your audience’s reactions
while your speech is in progress.
Analysis and adaptation do not end when you have crafted your speech. They
continue as you deliver your speech. Many beginning public speakers may find
it challenging at first not only to have the responsibility of presenting a speech
they have rehearsed, but also to have to change or modify the speech on the
spot. We assure you that with experience, you can develop the sensitivity to
adapt to your listeners, much as a jazz musician adapts to the other musicians in
the ensemble, but it will take practice.
Generally, a public speaker does not have an exchange with the audience
unless the speech is part of a question-and-answer or discussion format. Once
the speech is in progress, the speaker must rely on nonverbal cues from the audi-
ence to judge how people are responding to the message.
Identifying Nonverbal Audience Cues
Once, when speaking in India, Mark Twain was denied eye contact with his lis-
teners by a curtain separating him from his audience. Mark Twain’s daughter,
Clara, recalled this experience:
One of Father’s first lectures was before a Purdah audience; in other
words, the women all sat behind a curtain through which they could
peek at Mark Twain without being seen by him . . . a deadly affair for the
poor humorist, who had not even the pleasure of scanning the faces of
his mute audience.17
Mark Twain missed learning how well his speech was being received as he
was speaking. You could experience the same disadvantage if you fail to look at
your listeners while you’re speaking.
6.6
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 120 11/17/14 12:08 PM
121
Adapting to Your Audience as You Speak 6.6
Although it’s not possible to read your listeners’ minds, it is important to
analyze and adapt to often unspoken cues that can enhance the effectiveness of
your message. The first step in developing this skill is to be aware of the cues
that let you know whether your audience is hanging on every word or is bored.
Study Table 6.5 to learn to recognize five types of cues your listeners will give
you. After learning to “read” your audience, you then need to consider develop-
ing a repertoire of behaviors to help you to connect with your listeners.
Responding to Nonverbal Cues
The value in recognizing nonverbal cues from your listeners is that you can re-
spond to these cues appropriately. If your audience seems interested, support-
ive, and attentive, then your prespeech analysis has clearly led you to make
good choices in preparing and delivering your speech.
When your audience becomes inattentive, however, you might need to
make some changes while delivering your message. If you think audience mem-
bers are drifting off into their own thoughts or disagreeing with what you say
or if you suspect that they don’t understand what you are saying, then a few
spontaneous changes may help. It takes experience and skill to make on-the-
spot changes in your speech. Consider the following tips from seasoned public
speakers for adapting to your listeners.18
Table 6.5  Important Nonverbal Audience Cues
Type of Cue
You Probably ARE Connecting
with Your Audience if . . .
You Are NOT Connecting with Your
Audience if . . .
Eye Contact Most audience members look you in the
eye while you are speaking.
Audience members don’t make eye contact with
you. They make look down, at their phones or
watches, or at the program.
Facial Expression Audience members have sincere smiles
or pleasant facial expressions.
Audience members frown or display the “listener
stupor” look, a blank or unresponsive facial
expression, accompanied by a slightly tilted head,
often with a hand holding up the chin, which
indicates they are probably daydreaming.
Movement Audience members sit fairly still. Audience members fidget, squirm, or increase their
general body movement.
Nonverbal Responsiveness •	 Audience members nod in agree-
ment, laugh at your humor, or applaud
frequently.
•	 Audience members respond promptly
to your invitations, such as requests
for information or a show of hands.
•	 Audience members do not nod, laugh, or applaud
much.
•	 Audience members are slow and sheepish about
responding to your invitations.
Verbal Responsiveness Audience members may shout out
comments or answers to questions, or
remark quietly about your presentation to
the people near them.
Audience members do not respond to questions.
They may shout out negative comments or talk to
people near them about topics unrelated to your
talk.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 121 11/17/14 12:08 PM
122 Analyzing Your Audience
6.6
If your audience seems inattentive or bored:
•	 Tell a story.
•	 Use an example to which the audience can relate.
•	 Use a personal example.
•	 Remind your listeners why your message should be of interest to them.
•	 Eliminate some abstract facts and statistics.
•	 Use appropriate humor. If listeners do not respond to your humor, use more
stories or personal illustrations.
•	 Consider making direct references to the audience, using members’ names
or mentioning something about them.
•	 Encourage the audience to participate by asking questions or asking them
for an example.
•	 Ask for a direct response, such as a show of hands, to see whether they
agree or disagree with you.
•	 Pick up the pace of your delivery.
•	 Pause for dramatic effect and to gain attention.
If your audience seems confused or doesn’t seem to understand your point:
•	 Be more redundant.
•	 Try phrasing your information in another way.
•	 Use more concrete examples to illustrate your point.
•	 Use a visual aid such as a chalkboard or flipchart to clarify your point.
•	 If you have been speaking rapidly, slow down your speaking rate.
•	 Clarify the overall organization of your message for your listeners.
•	 Ask audience members whether they understand your message.
•	 Ask for feedback from an audience member to help you discover what is unclear.
•	 Ask someone in the audience to summarize the key point you are making.
If your audience seems to be disagreeing with your message:
•	 Provide additional data and evidence to support your point.
•	 Remind your listeners of your credibility, credentials, or background.
•	 Rely less on anecdotes and more on facts to present your case.
•	 Write facts on a chalkboard, overhead transparency, or flipchart if one is handy.
•	 If you don’t have the answers and data you need, tell listeners that you will
provide more information by mail, telephone, or email (and make sure you
get back in touch with them).
Remember, it is not enough just to notice your listeners’ characteristics and at-
titudes. You must also respond to the information you gather, by adapting your speech
to retain their interest and attention. Moreover, you have a responsibility to ensure
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 122 11/17/14 12:08 PM
123
Adapting to Your Audience as You Speak 6.6
that your audience understands your message. If your approach to the content of your
speech is not working, alter it and note whether your audience’s responses change.
If all else fails, you may need to abandon a formal speaker—listener relation-
ship with your audience and open up your topic for discussion. In your speech
class, your instructor may expect you to keep going, to fulfill the requirements
for your assignment. With other audiences, however, you might want to con-
sider switching to a more interactive question-and-answer session to ensure that
you are communicating clearly. Later chapters on supporting material, speech
organization, and speech delivery will discuss more techniques for adjusting
your style while delivering your message.
Strategies for Customizing Your Message to Your
Audience
Many people value having something prepared especially for them. Perhaps you
have bought a computer that you ordered to your exact specifications. In a restau-
rant, you order food prepared to your specific tastes. Audiences, too, prefer mes-
sages that are adapted just to them; people don’t like hearing a canned message.
As a speaker, you may have worked hard to adapt your message to your audi-
ence, but your audience won’t give you credit for it unless you let them know that
you’ve done so. In the following sections, we discuss some ways to communicate
to your listeners that your message is designed specifically for them.
Appropriately Use Audience Members’ Names  Consider using audi-
ence members’ names in your talk to relate specific information to individual
people. Obviously, you don’t want to embarrass people by using them in an ex-
ample that would make them feel uncomfortable. But you can selectively men-
tion people you know who are in the audience. It’s become a standard technique
in many State of the Union speeches for the president to have someone sitting
in the balcony who can be mentioned in his talk. That person becomes a living
visual aid to provide focus for an idea or point made in the address. If you are
uncertain whether you should mention someone by name, ask the person, be-
fore you speak, for permission to use his or her name in your talk.
Refer to The Town, City, or Community  Make a specific reference to
the place where you are speaking. If you are speaking to a college audience, re-
late your message and illustrations to the school where you are speaking. Many
politicians use this technique: They have a standard stump speech to tout their
credentials but adapt the opening part of their message to the specific city or
community in which they are speaking.
Refer to a Significant Event that Happened on The Date of
Your Speech  Type “This Day in History” in most any search engine, and
you’ll find out what happened on the day of your speech. For example, on the date
when this paragraph was written, Julius Caesar was assassinated in 44 b.c.e. This
date is also known as the Ides of March—a day that Caesar was warned about in
Shakespeare’s famous play. If you were giving a speech on this day, a reference to
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 123 11/17/14 12:08 PM
124 Analyzing Your Audience
6.6
the Ides of March might be especially apropos if your goal was to encourage your
audience to beware of whatever issue or topic you were discussing.
Many newspapers keep records of local historical events and list what hap-
pened ten, twenty-five, or fifty years ago on a certain date. Relating your talk to
a local historical event that occurred on the same date as your talk can give your
message a feeling of immediacy. It tells your audience that you have thought
about this specific speaking event.
Refer to A Recent News Event  Always read or watch the local news to
see whether there is a local news story that you can connect to the central idea of
your talk. Or perhaps you can use a headline from your university newspaper or
a recent story that appeared on your university’s Web site. If there is a newspa-
per headline that connects with your talk, consider holding up the paper as you
refer to it—not so that people will be able to read the headline, but to emphasize
the immediacy of your message.
Refer to A Group or Organization  If you’re speaking to an audience
of service, religious, political, or work group members, by all means make specific
positive references to the group. But be honest—don’t offer false praise. Audiences
can sniff out phony flattery. A sincere compliment about the group will be appreci-
ated, especially if you can link the goals of the group to the goal of your talk.
Relate Information Directly to Your Listeners  Find ways to ap-
ply facts, statistics, and examples to the people in your audience. If, for example,
you know that four out of ten women are likely to experience gender discrimi-
nation, customize that statistic by saying, “Forty percent of women listening to
me now are likely to experience gender discrimination. That means of the twenty
women in this audience, eight of you are likely to be discriminated against.” Or if
you live in a city of fifty thousand people, you can cite the statistic that fifty thou-
sand people on our nation’s highways become victims of drunk driving each year
and then point out that this number is equivalent to killing every man, woman,
and child in your city. Relating abstract statistics and examples to your listeners
communicates that you have them in mind as you develop your message.
Quick Check
Customizing Your Message
Make sure your audience knows that you prepared your talk just for them:
•	 Mention the audience’s group, or use individual names, if appropriate.
•	 Mention the place where you’re speaking or a recent local news event.
•	 Relate an event from history to the date of your speech.
•	 Show how abstract statistics apply to the audience.
•	 Avoid pandering to listeners or making up information.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 124 11/17/14 12:08 PM
125
Analyzing Your Audience after You Speak 6.7
Analyzing Your Audience after You
Speak
6.7	 Identify methods of assessing audience reactions after you have
concluded your speech.
After you have given your speech, you’re still not finished analyzing your
­
audience. It is important to evaluate your audience’s positive or negative
­
response to your message. Why? Because this evaluation can help you to ­
prepare
your next speech. Postspeech analysis helps you to polish your speaking skill,
regardless of whether you will face the same audience again. From that analysis,
you can learn whether your examples were clear and whether listeners accepted
your message. Let’s look at some specific methods for assessing your audience’s
­
response to your speech.
6.7
Nonverbal Responses
The most obvious nonverbal response is applause. Is the audience simply clap-
ping politely, or is the applause robust and enthusiastic, indicating pleasure and
acceptance? Responsive facial expressions, smiles, and nods are other nonverbal
signs that the speech has been well received.
You need to continue analyzing your audience even after you finish speaking. You
can gather information from the way listeners applaud, as well as from verbal,
survey, or behavioral responses.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 125 11/17/14 12:08 PM
126 Analyzing Your Audience
6.7
Realize, however, that audience members from different cultures respond
to speeches in different ways. Japanese audience members, for example, are
likely to be restrained in their response to a speech and to show little expression.
Some Eastern European listeners might not maintain eye contact with you; they
may look down at the floor when listening. In some contexts, African American
­
listeners may enthusiastically voice their agreement or disagreement with some-
thing you say during your presentation.19
Verbal Responses
Nonverbal responses at the end of the speech may express some general feeling
of the audience, but they are not much help in identifying which strategies were
the most effective. Also consider what the members of the audience say, both to
you and to others, after your speech. General comments such as “I enjoyed your
talk” or “Great speech” are good for the ego—which is important—but are not
of much analytic help. Specific comments can indicate where you succeeded and
where you failed. If you have the chance, try to ask audience members how they
responded to the speech in general as well as to points in which you are particu-
larly interested.
Survey Responses
You are already aware of the value of conducting audience surveys before
speaking publicly. You might also want to survey your audience after you
speak. You can then assess how well you accomplished your objective. Use
the same survey techniques that we discussed earlier. Develop survey ques-
tions that will help you to determine the audience’s general reactions to you
and your speech as well as specific responses to your ideas and supporting
­
materials. Professional speakers and public officials often conduct such ­
surveys.
­
Postspeech surveys are especially useful when you are trying to persuade an
audience. Comparing prespeech and postspeech attitudes can give you a clear
idea of your effectiveness. If your objective was to teach your audience about
some new idea, a posttest can assess whether you expressed your ideas clearly.
In fact, classroom exams are posttests that determine whether your instructor
presented information clearly.
Behavioral Responses
If the purpose of your speech was to persuade your listeners to do something,
you will want to learn whether they ultimately behave as you intended. If you
wanted them to vote in an upcoming election, you might survey your listeners
to find out how many did vote. If you wanted to win support for a particular
cause or organization, you might ask them to sign a petition after your speech.
The number of signatures would be a clear measure of your speech’s success.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 126 11/17/14 12:08 PM
127
Analyzing Your Audience after You Speak 6.7
Some religious speakers judge the success of their ministry by the amount of
contributions they receive. Your listeners’ actions are the best indicators of your
speaking success.
Quick Check
Ways to Analyze Your Audience after Speaking
•	 Quality of applause and other nonverbal responses
•	 Content and tone of specific verbal comments
•	 Formal survey responses
•	 Actions or behaviors
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 127 11/17/14 12:08 PM
128 Chapter 6 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
6.1	 List three steps in becoming an audience-centered speaker.
To become an audience-centered speaker, first gather information about your au-
dience. Then, analyze the information, and use it to ethically adapt your speech
to your listeners.
6.2	 Describe informal and formal methods of gathering information about
your audience.
You can gather information about your audience by informally observing their
demographics. Formal surveys, with either open-ended or closed-ended ques-
tions, can add more specific information about their opinions.
Key Terms
Demographics Open-ended questions Closed-ended questions
6.3	 Explain how to analyze information about your audience.
Analyze information you’ve gathered, looking for (1) similarities among audi-
ence members, (2) differences among audience members, and (3) ways to estab-
lish a relationship, or common ground, with listeners.
Key Terms
Audience analysis Common ground Relationship
6.4	 Identify and use strategies for adapting to your audience.
Based on their audience analysis, ethical speakers first consider their audience;
then they adapt their speech goal, content, and delivery to connect to the audi-
ence, so that audience members will listen.
Key Term
Audience adaptation
6.5	 Develop methods of analyzing your audience before you speak by
seeking demographic, psychological, and situational information about
your audience and the speaking occasion.
Demographic analysis assesses audience diversity. Strategies for adapting to
a diverse audience include (1) focusing on a target audience, (2) using diverse
strategies, (3) using common audience perspectives, and (4) relying on visual
materials that transcend language differences.
Psychological audience analysis helps you gauge the interests, attitudes, be-
liefs, and values of listeners. Situational audience analysis includes examining
the time and place of your speech, the size of your audience, and the speaking
occasion.
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 128 11/17/14 12:08 PM
129
Chapter 6 study guide
Key Terms
Demographic audience
 analysis
Gender
Sex
Culture
Ethnicity
Race
Ethnocentrism
Socioeconomic Status
Target audience
Psychological audience
 analysis
Attitude
Belief
Value
Situational audience
 analysis
6.6	 Identify methods of assessing and adapting to your audience’s reactions
while your speech is in progress.
Audience feedback, including eye contact, facial expression, movement, and gen-
eral verbal and nonverbal responsiveness, provides clues to how well your mes-
sage is being received. Listeners’ nonverbal reactions may indicate that you need
to adjust your message to maintain interest and achieve your speaking objective.
6.7	 Identify methods of assessing audience reactions after you have
concluded your speech.
Evaluate audience reaction after your speech. Again, nonverbal cues as well as
verbal ones will help you judge your speaking skill. The best indicator of your
speaking success is whether your audience is able or willing to follow your ad-
vice or remembers what you have told them.
Think about These Questions
•	 Phil Owens is running for a seat on the school board. He has agreed to speak to
the chamber of commerce about his views, but he wants to know what his au-
dience believes about a number of issues. How can he gather this information?
•	 Tynisha wants to convince her audience to ban alcohol in all city parks. Her
survey results suggest that 85 percent of her audience wants to continue the
current policy of permitting alcohol in city parks. Should she change her
purpose to fit the existing attitudes of her audience? Why or why not? How
can she establish common ground with this audience?
•	 Dr. Ruiz thought that the audience for her speech on birth control would be
women of childbearing age. After writing her speech, however, she found
out that all the women to whom she will be speaking are at least twenty
years older than she expected. What changes, if any, should she make?
M06_BEEB3981_05_SE_C06_095-130.indd 129 11/17/14 12:08 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
Part 3
Preparing a Speech
Chapter 7	 Developing Your Speech
Chapter 8	 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Preparing
a
Speech
Chapters
7-8
3
M07A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB3.indd 65 11/18/14 8:38 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Chapter 7  Developing Your Speech
1.	 What three things should you consider when choosing a topic for a speech?
2.	 At lunch, you overhear a stranger at the next table mention a book she used as a key
reference for a political science paper she wrote. Would it be ethical for you to borrow
her topic and consult the book she mentioned to prepare a speech for a public-speaking
course? Why or why not?
Chapter 8  Gathering and Using Supporting Material
1.	 In your own words, define description, explanation, and definition.
2.	 Is it ever ethical to invent supporting material if you have been unable to find what you
need for your speech? Explain.
Preparing
a
Speech
Chapters
7-8
3
M07A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB3.indd 66 11/18/14 8:38 PM
131
Chapter 7
Developing
Your Speech
“In all matters,
before beginning,
a diligent prepa-
ration should be
made.”
—Cicero
	7.1	Select and Narrow Your Topic
Guidelines for Selecting a Topic
Strategies for Selecting a Topic
Narrowing the Topic
	7.2	Determine Your Purpose
General Purpose
Specific Purpose
	7.3	Develop Your Central Idea
A Complete Declarative Sentence
Direct, Specific Language
A Single Idea
An Audience-Centered Idea
Outline
(continued)
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 131 07/11/14 12:25 PM
132 Developing Your Speech
7﻿
Learning Objectives
	7.1	Select and narrow a topic for a speech that is appropriate to the
audience, the occasion, the time limits, and yourself.
	7.2	Write an audience-centered specific-purpose statement for a speech.
	7.3	State a single audience-centered central idea with direct, specific
language in a complete declarative sentence.
	7.4	Apply three ways of generating main ideas from a central idea.
Ed Garcia has arranged the books and papers on his desk into neat, even piles. He
has sharpened his pencils and laid them out parallel to one another. He has even
dusted his desktop and cleaned the computer monitor’s screen. Ed can think of
no other task to delay writing his speech. He opens a new word-processing docu-
ment, carefully centers the words “Informative Speech” at the top of the first page,
and then slouches in his chair, staring glumly at the blank expanse that threatens
his well-being. Finally, he types the words “College Football” under the words
“Informative Speech.” There is another long pause. Hesitantly, he begins his first
sentence: “Today I want to talk to you about college football.” Rereading his first
ten words, Ed decides that they sound moronic. He deletes the sentence and tries
again. This time, the screen looks even blanker than before. He writes—deletes—
writes—deletes. Half an hour later, Ed is exhausted and still mocked by a blank
screen. And he is frantic—this speech has to be ready by nine in the morning.
Getting from a blank screen or sheet of paper to a speech outline is often the
biggest hurdle you will face as a public speaker. Fortunately, however, it is one
that you can learn to clear. If your earlier efforts at speech writing have been like
Ed Garcia’s, take heart. Just as you learned to read, do long division, drive a car,
and get through college registration, so too can you learn to prepare a speech.
The first steps in preparing a speech are these:
 1.	Select and narrow your topic.
 2.	Determine your purpose.
 3.	Develop your central idea.
 4.	Generate your main ideas.
At the end of step 4, you will have a plan for the speech, and you will be
ready to develop and polish your main ideas further. For most brief classroom
speeches (under ten minutes), you should allow at least one week between
	7.4	Generate and Preview Your Main
Ideas
Generating Your Main Ideas
Previewing Your Main Ideas
	7.5	Meanwhile, Back at the Computer . . .
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 132 07/11/14 12:25 PM
133
Select and Narrow Your Topic 7.1
selecting a topic and delivering your speech. A week gives you enough time to
develop and research your speech. Many habitual procrastinators, like Ed Gar-
cia, who grudgingly decide to begin an assignment a week in advance, learn to
their surprise that the whole process is far easier than it would be if they put off
working until the night before they are supposed to deliver their speech.
As we observed in Chapter 6, audience-centered speakers consider the
needs, interests, and expectations of their audience during the entire speech-
preparation process—needs, interests, and expectations that will be as diverse
as the audiences themselves. As you move from topic selection to speech plan,
remember that you are preparing a message for your listeners. Always keep the
audience as your central focus.
Select and Narrow Your Topic
7.1	 Select and narrow a topic for a speech that is appropriate to the
audience, the occasion, the time limits, and yourself.
Your first task, as illustrated in Figure 7.1, is to choose a topic on which to speak.
You will then need to narrow this topic to fit your time limits. Sometimes you can
eliminate one or both of these steps because the topic has been chosen and properly
defined for you. For example, knowing that you visited England’s Lake District on
your tour of Great Britain last summer, your English literature teacher asks you to
speak about the mountains and lakes of that region before your class studies the
poetry of Wordsworth and Coleridge. Or knowing that you chair the local drug-abuse
task force, the Lions Club asks you to speak at its weekly meeting about the work
of your group. In both cases, your topic and its scope have been decided for you.
At other times, the choice of topic may be left entirely to you. In your public-
speaking class, your instructor may specify a time limit and type of speech (in-
formative, persuasive, or entertaining) but allow you to choose your topic. In
this event, you should realize that the success of your speech may rest on your
decision. But how do you go about choosing an appropriate, interesting topic?
Guidelines for Selecting a Topic
In May 2012, CNN and Time journalist Fareed Zakaria delivered much the same
speech to the graduating class of Harvard as he had delivered to Duke graduates
less than two weeks earlier. After beginning both speeches with the same anecdote
about missing his own college graduation, Zakaria went on to use similar, some-
times identical, language and content in the two speeches. Any listeners who later
Googled the speech probably felt cheated when they discovered that Zakaria had
also delivered essentially the same speech to an entirely different group.1
CONSIDER THE AUDIENCE  In contrast to Fareed Zakaria, autism activist and
animal behaviorist Temple Grandin notes that when she is invited to deliver a
commencement address, she makes it a point to find out about “each campus,
the place, and the people,” and to adapt her speech accordingly.2 You, too, should
keep in mind each audience’s interests and expectations. “What interests and
7.1
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 133 07/11/14 12:25 PM
134 Developing Your Speech
7.1
needs do the members of this audience have in common?” and “Why did they ask
me to speak?” are important questions to ask yourself as you search for potential
speech topics. For example, a university president who has been invited to speak
to a civic organization should talk about some new university program or recent
accomplishment; a police officer speaking to an elementary school’s PTA should
address the audience’s concern for the safety of young children.
Not only should a speaker’s choice of topic be relevant to the interests and
expectations of his or her listeners; it should also take into account the knowledge
listeners already have about the subject. For example, the need for a campus-
wide office of disability services would not be a good topic to discuss in a speech
to a group of students with disabilities, who would already be well aware of
such a need. The speech would offer them no new information.
Finally, speakers should choose topics that are important—topics that mat-
ter to their listeners as well as to themselves. Student speaker Roger Fringer
explains the stakes for students in a public-speaking class:
We work hard for our tuition, so we should spend it wisely. Spending it
wisely means . . . we don’t waste our classmates’ time who have to listen
to our speeches.3
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main
Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select
and Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Figure 7.1  Selecting and narrowing the topic and determining
the general and specific purposes of the speech are early
speechmaking tasks.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 134 07/11/14 12:25 PM
135
Select and Narrow Your Topic 7.1
Several years ago, communication scholar and then-president of the
National Communication Association Bruce Gronbeck reminded an audience of
communication instructors that students should be giving “the important kinds
of . . . speeches that show . . . people how to confront the issues that divide
them.”4 Table 7.1 offers examples of topics that are appropriate for the interests,
expectations, knowledge, and concerns of particular audiences.
Consider The Occasion  On December 17, 1877, Mark Twain was invited
to be one of the after-dinner speakers at American poet John Greenleaf Whittier’s
seventieth-birthday celebration.5 The guest list included such dignitaries as Oli-
ver Wendell Holmes, Ralph Waldo Emerson, William Dean Howells, and Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow. When it was Twain’s turn to speak, he began with a
humorous sketch featuring Longfellow, Emerson, and Holmes as drunken card-
playing travelers in Nevada. Used to laughter and applause from his audiences,
Twain was stunned by the silence.
What had gone wrong? Was Mark Twain’s topic of interest to his listeners?
Undoubtedly. Did they expect to hear someone talk about the distinguished
guests? Yes. Could Twain add to their knowledge of the subject? Probably. Was his
topic appropriate to the occasion? Definitely not!
Although after-dinner speeches are usually humorous, Twain’s irrever-
ence was inappropriate to the dignity of this birthday observance. Even though
he had considered his audience, he had not considered carefully enough the
demands of the occasion. Twain’s irreverent talk aroused quite a commotion at
the time and is said to have embarrassed him for years afterward. To be successful,
a topic must be appropriate to both audience and occasion.
Consider Yourself  What do you talk about with your friends? You prob-
ably discuss school, mutual friends, political or social issues, hobbies or leisure
activities, or whatever other topics are of interest and importance to you. Like
most people, your liveliest, most animated conversations revolve around topics
of personal concern that arouse your deepest convictions.
The best public-speaking topics are also those that reflect your personal
experience or especially interest you. Where have you lived? Where have you
traveled? Describe your family or your ancestors. Have you held any part-time jobs?
Table 7.1  Sample Audience-Centered Topics
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Audience Topic
Retirees Prescription drug benefits
Civic organization The Special Olympics
Church members Starting a community food bank
First graders What to do in case of a fire at home
Teachers Building children’s self-esteem
College fraternity Campus service opportunities
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 135 11/11/14 4:35 PM
136 Developing Your Speech
7.1
Describe your first days at college. What are your favorite classes? What are your
hobbies or interests? What is your favorite sport? What social issues especially
concern you? Here is one list of topics that was generated by such questions:
Blues music
“Yankee, go home”: the American tourist in France
Why most diets fail
Behind the counter at McDonald’s
My first day at college
Maintaining family ties while living a long distance from home
Getting involved in political campaigns
An alternative to selecting a topic with which you are already familiar is to
select one that you would like to know more about. Your interest will motivate
both your research and your eventual delivery of the speech.
Strategies for Selecting a Topic
All successful topics reflect audience, occasion, and speaker. But just contem-
plating those guidelines does not automatically produce a good topic. Sooner
or later, we all find ourselves unable to think of a good speech topic, whether it
is for the first speech of the semester, that all-important final speech, or a speak-
ing engagement long after our school years are over. Nothing is as frustrating
to a public speaker as floundering for something to talk about! In such an
instance, you may want to turn to one of the following strategies to help gener-
ate a speech topic.
BRAINSTORMING  A problem-solving technique that is widely used in such
diverse fields as business, advertising, writing, and science, brainstorming or
visual brainstorming can easily be used to generate ideas for speech topics as
well.6 For example, the following list of twenty-one possible topics came from a
brainstorming session that lasted about three minutes:
Music	Reggae
Bob Marley	 Sound-recording technology
Retro music	 Buddy Holly
Censorship of music	 Movie themes
Oscar-winning movies of the 1950s	 Great epic movies
Titanic (the movie)	 Salvaging the Titanic (the ship)
The Beatles	 John Lennon
Alternative music	 Popular rock bands
iTunes	 Treasure hunting
Key West, Florida	 Ernest Hemingway
Polydactyl cats
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 136 07/11/14 12:25 PM
137
Select and Narrow Your Topic 7.1
The How To box list gives you step-by-step instructions for brainstorming.
If your brainstorming yields several good topics, so much the better. Set aside a
page or two in your class notebook or an electronic file where you list topic ideas
that you don’t end up choosing. You can then reconsider them when you get
your next assignment.
LISTENING AND READING FOR TOPIC IDEAS  Very often, something you
see, hear, or read triggers an idea for a speech. A current story from your favorite
news source may suggest a topic. The following list of topics was brought to
mind by recent headline stories in a large daily newspaper:
Cyber-espionage
Recovery in the housing market
Issues for same-sex married couples
The rising cost of flood insurance
Mexican drug wars
Optimal advance warning time for tornadoes
In addition to discovering topics in news stories, you might find them in an
interesting segment of 20/20, Dateline, or even a daytime talk show. Chances are
that a topic covered in one medium has been covered in another as well, allow-
ing extended research on the topic. For example, Dr. Oz’s report on the germiest
places in your home may be paralleled by Time’s article on the dangers of over-
using antibacterial cleaning products.
You may also find speech topics in one of your classes. One of the topics
that we’ve mentioned so far might cause you to get an idea, or a lecture in an
economics or political science class may arouse your interest and provide a good
topic for your next speech. The instructor of that class could probably suggest
additional references on the subject.
Sometimes even a subject that you discuss casually with friends can be
developed into a good speech topic. You have probably talked with classmates
about such campus issues as dormitory regulations, inadequate parking, or your
frustration with registration and advisors. Campuswide concerns would be
Brainstorm for a Topic
•	 Start with a blank sheet of paper.
•	 Set a time limit for brainstorming.
•	 Begin writing; list as many possible topics for a speech as you can.
•	 Do not stop to evaluate your topics; just write them down.
•	 Let one idea lead to another—free-associate; piggyback off your own ideas.
•	 Keep writing until your time is up.
HOW
TO
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 137 07/11/14 12:25 PM
138 Developing Your Speech
7.1
relevant to the student audience in your speech class, as would such matters as
how to find a good summer job or the pros and cons of living on or off campus.
Just as you jotted down possible topics generated by brainstorming sessions,
remember to write down topic ideas that you get from what’s trending in social
media you use, class lectures, and informal conversations. If you rely on memory
alone, what seems like a great topic today may be only a frustrating blank tomorrow.
SCANNING WEB DIRECTORIES  By now, you probably have a list of topics
from which to choose. But if all your efforts have failed to produce any ideas
that satisfy you, try the following strategy:
Access a Web directory such as Yahoo! Directory (dir.yahoo.com), and select
a category at random. Click on it, and look through the subcategories that come
up. Click on one of them. Continue to follow the chain of categories until you
see a topic that piques your interest—or until you reach a dead end, in which
case you can return to the Yahoo! Directory homepage and try again.
A recent random directory search yielded the following category and sub-
categories, listed from general to specific:
Society and culture
Environment and nature
Ecotourism
This search took only a few minutes (as will yours, as long as you resist the
temptation to begin surfing the Web) and yielded at least one possible topic: The
pros and cons of ecotourism. An additional advantage of this strategy is that you
begin to develop your preliminary bibliography while you are searching for a topic.
Quick Check
Selecting a Topic
Guidelines:
•	 Consider the audience.
•	 Consider the occasion.
•	 Consider yourself.
Strategies:
•	 Brainstorm.
•	 Listen and read.
•	 Scan Web directories.
Narrowing the Topic
After brainstorming, reading the newspaper, surfing the Web, and talking to
friends, you have come up with a topic. For some students, the toughest part
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 138 07/11/14 12:25 PM
139
Determine Your Purpose 7.2
of the assignment is over at this point. But others soon experience additional
frustration because their topic is so broad that they find themselves over-
whelmed with information. How can you cover all aspects of a topic as large
as “television” in three to five minutes? Even if you trained yourself to speak
as rapidly as an auctioneer, it would take days to get it all in! The solution is to
narrow your topic so that it fits within the time limits set by your assignment.
The challenge lies in how to do this. The How To box describes one helpful
method.
Determine Your Purpose
7.2	 Write an audience-centered specific-purpose statement for a speech.
Now that you have selected and narrowed your topic, you need to decide on
a purpose (as shown in Figure 7.1). If you do not know what you want your
speech to achieve, chances are your audience won’t either. Ask yourself, “What
is really important for the audience to hear?” and “How do I want the audience
to respond?” Clarifying your objectives at this stage will ensure a more interest-
ing speech and a more successful outcome.
7.2
Narrow Your Topic
Try these two steps to narrow a broad, unmanageable topic:
	1.	
Create categories.  Divide the topic, similar to the categories used in Web directories. First,
write your general topic at the top of a list. Then add words to the topic, making each
added word a more specific or concrete topic. Here’s an example:
Music
Folk music
Irish folk music
The popularity of Irish folk music in the United States
	2.	
Find the right level.  Use the time limit of your speech to choose a topic from the correct
spot on your list.
•	 Not too broad:  If your topic is still a bit too broad—say, you simply cannot cover all the
forms of Irish folk music that are popular in the United States during a five-minute talk—
continue to add more categories to your list. In this example, you might choose one
form of music—dance music—and talk about the kind of Irish hard-shoe dance music
featured in Riverdance.
•	 Not too narrow:  If you find that you’ve narrowed your topic too much—so that you
cannot find enough information for even a three-minute talk—just go back a step. In our
example, you could return to the broader topic of the popularity of Irish folk music in the
United States.
HOW
TO
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 139 07/11/14 12:25 PM
140 Developing Your Speech
7.2
General Purpose
The general purpose, or overarching goal, of virtually any speech is to inform,
to persuade, or to entertain. The speeches that you give in class will generally
be either informative or persuasive. It is important that you fully understand
what constitutes each type of speech so that you do not confuse them and fail to
fulfill an assignment. You certainly do not want to deliver a first-rate persuasive
speech when an informative one was assigned! Chapter 15–18 discuss the three
general purposes at length. We also offer you a summary of the basic principles
of each here.
SPEAKING TO INFORM  An informative speaker is a teacher. Informative
speakers give listeners information. They define, describe, or explain a thing,
person, place, concept, process, or function. In this excerpt from a student’s
informative speech on anorexia nervosa, the student describes the disorder for
her audience:
Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder that affects 1 out of every 200
American women. It is a self-induced starvation that can waste its vic-
tims to the point that they resemble victims of Nazi concentration
camps.7
Most lectures that you hear in college are informative. The university presi-
dent’s annual “state of the university” speech is also informative, as is the tour
guide’s talk at Colonial Williamsburg. Such speakers are all trying to increase
their listeners’ knowledge. Although they may use an occasional bit of humor
in their presentations, their main objective is not to entertain. And although they
may provoke an audience’s interest in the topic, their main objective is not to
persuade.
SPEAKING TO PERSUADE  Persuasive speakers may offer information, but
they use the information to try to change or reinforce an audience’s convictions
and often to urge some sort of action. For example, Brian offered compelling
statistics to help persuade his audience to take steps to prevent and alleviate
chronic pain:
A hundred million Americans, nearly a third of the population, [suffer]
from chronic pain due to everything from accidents to the simple daily
stresses on our bodies.8
The representative from Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) who
spoke at your high-school assembly urged you not to drink and drive and urged
you to help others realize the inherent dangers of the practice. The fraternity
president talking to your group of rushees tried to convince you to join his
fraternity. Appearing on television during the last election, the candidates for
president of the United States asked for your vote. All these speakers gave you
information, but they used that information to try to get you to believe or do
something.
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 140 07/11/14 12:25 PM
141
Determine Your Purpose 7.2
SPEAKING TO ENTERTAIN  The entertaining speaker tries to get the members
of an audience to relax, smile, perhaps laugh, and generally enjoy themselves.
Storyteller Garrison Keillor spins tales of the town and residents of Lake Wobe-
gon, Minnesota, to amuse his listeners. Comedian Louis C.K. delivers comic
patter to make his audience laugh. Most after-dinner speakers talk to entertain
the banquet guests. Like persuasive speakers, entertaining speakers may inform
their listeners, but providing knowledge is not their main goal. Rather, their ob-
jective is to produce at least a smile and at best a belly laugh.
Early on, you need to decide which of the three general purposes your
speech is to have. This decision keeps you on track throughout the develop-
ment of your speech. The way in which you organize, support, and deliver your
speech depends, in part, on your general purpose.
Quick Check
General Purposes for Speeches
To inform: To share information with listeners by defining, describing, or explaining
a thing, person, place, concept, process, or function
To persuade: To change or reinforce a listener’s attitude, belief, value, or behavior
To entertain: To help listeners have a good time by getting them to relax, smile, and
laugh
Specific Purpose
Now that you have a topic and you know generally whether your speech should
inform, persuade, or entertain, it is time you decided on its specific purpose, the
concise statement of what you want your listeners to know, feel, or be able to do
when you finish speaking. Unlike the general purpose, which can be assigned
by your instructor, you alone must decide the specific purpose of your speech,
because it depends directly on the topic you choose.
IDENTIFY A BEHAVIORAL OBJECTIVE  To arrive at a specific purpose for
your speech, you must think in precise terms of what you want your audience
to be able to do at the end of your speech. This kind of goal or purpose is called a
behavioral objective, because you specify the behavior you seek from the audience.
The How To box offers a formula you can use to develop a specific-purpose
statement for a speech with any general purpose. For a speech on how television
comedy represents the modern family, you might write, “At the end of my speech,
the audience will be able to explain how television comedies portray American
family life today.” The specific-purpose statement for a how-to speech using
visual aids might read, “At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to use
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 141 07/11/14 12:25 PM
142 Developing Your Speech
7.2
the principles of feng shui to select wall colors.” A specific-purpose statement
for a persuasive speech could say, “At the end of my speech, the audience will
be able to explain why the United States should ban texting while driving.” A
speech to entertain has a specific purpose, too. “At the end of my speech, the
audience will laugh and applaud.” An after-dinner speaker whose entertaining
message has more informative value than that of the stand-up comic might say,
“At the end of my speech, the audience will list four characteristics that distin-
guish journalists from the rest of the human species.”
CHARACTERISTICS OF A SPECIFIC PURPOSE  Note that a statement of pur-
pose does not say what you, the speaker, will do. The techniques of public speak-
ing help you to achieve your goals, but they are not themselves goals. To say, “In
my speech, I will talk about the benefits of studying classical dance” emphasizes
your performance as a speaker. The goal of the speech is centered on you rather
than on the audience. Other than restating your topic, this statement of purpose
provides little direction for the speech. But to say, “At the end of my speech, the
audience will be able to list three ways in which studying classical dance can
benefit them” places the audience and their behavior at the center of your con-
cern. This latter statement provides a tangible goal that can guide your prepara-
tion and by which you can measure the success of your speech.
The following guidelines will also help you to prepare your statement of
purpose:
•	 Use words that refer to observable or measurable behavior.
Not observable: At the end of my speech, the audience will know some things
about Hannibal, Missouri.
Formulate Your Specific-Purpose Statement
	1.	
Start with standard wording.  Almost all specific-purpose statements begin with the same
words: “At the end of my speech, the audience will [be able to]. . . .”
	2.	
Add a verb.  The next word in your statement should be a verb that names an observable,
measurable action that the audience should be able to take by the end of the speech.
•	 DO use verbs such as list, explain, describe, or write.
•	 DON’T use words such as know, understand, or believe. You can discover what your
listeners know, understand, or believe only by having them show their increased capabil-
ity in some measurable way.
	3.	
Finish with details.  The last part of your statement should give details that explain the ac-
tion you want your listeners to do. The details reflect the topic of your speech. They often
provide the answer to “w” questions you may have learned as a child: who, what, where,
when, and so on. For example, the statement “At the end of my speech the audience will
be able to wash any size car by themselves at home” gives details about where and with
whom listeners will be able to wash which car.
HOW
TO
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 142 07/11/14 12:25 PM
143
Develop Your Central Idea 7.3
Observable: At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to list five
points of interest in the town of Hannibal, Missouri.
•	 Limit the specific purpose to a single idea. If your statement of purpose has more
than one idea, you will have trouble covering the extra ideas in your speech.
You will also run the risk of having your speech “come apart at the seams.”
Your speech is likely to lack unity of ideas and coherence of expression.
Two ideas: At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to write a simple
computer program in BASIC and play the video game Bioshock Infinite.
One idea: At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to write a simple
computer program in BASIC.
•	 Make sure your specific purpose reflects the interests, expectations, and knowledge
level of your audience. Also be sure that your specific purpose is important.
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed these criteria as guidelines for select-
ing a speech topic. Consider them again as you word your specific-purpose
statement.
Behavioral statements of purpose help to remind you that the aim of public
speaking is to win a response from the audience. In addition, using a specific
purpose to guide the development of your speech helps you to focus on the au-
dience during the entire preparation process.
USING THE SPECIFIC PURPOSE  Everything you do while preparing and de-
livering the speech should contribute to your specific purpose. The specific pur-
pose can help you to assess the information you are gathering for your speech.
For example, you may find that an interesting statistic, although related to your
topic, does not help to achieve your specific purpose. In that case, you can sub-
stitute material that directly advances your purpose.
As soon as you have decided on it, write the specific purpose on a three- by
five-inch note card. Then refer to it as often as necessary while developing your
speech.
Develop Your Central Idea
7.3	 State a single audience-centered central idea with direct, specific
language in a complete declarative sentence.
Having stated the specific purpose of your speech, you are ready to develop your
central idea, the first step highlighted in Figure 7.2. The central idea (sometimes
called the thesis) states in one sentence what the speech is about. You can use your
specific-purpose statement to help you write your central idea. However, as Table 7.2
summarizes, a central idea differs from a purpose statement in both focus and ap-
plication. A purpose statement focuses on audience behavior, whereas the central
idea focuses on the content of the speech. A purpose statement guides your deci-
sions as you prepare the speech; the central idea becomes part of your final speech.
7.3
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 143 07/11/14 12:25 PM
144 Developing Your Speech
7.3
Professional speech coach Judith Humphrey explains the importance of a
central idea:
Ask yourself before writing a speech . . . “What’s my point?” Be able to
state that message in a single clear sentence. Everything else you say will
support that single argument.9
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main
Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select
and Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Figure 7.2  State your central idea as a one-sentence summary
of your speech, and then generate main ideas by looking for
natural divisions, reasons, or steps to support your central idea.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
Table 7.2  Purpose Statement versus Central Idea
The Purpose Statement The Central Idea
Indicates what the audience should be able to do by the
end of the speech
Summarizes the speech in one sentence
Guides the speaker’s choices throughout the preparation
of the speech
Is stated in the speech
The Central Idea Should . . .
•	 Be a complete declarative sentence
•	 Use direct, specific language
•	 Be a single idea
•	 Be an audience-centered idea
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 144 07/11/14 12:25 PM
145
Develop Your Central Idea 7.3
The guidelines in the following sections can help you to put your central
idea into words.
A Complete Declarative Sentence
The central idea should be a complete declarative sentence—not a phrase or
clause and not a question.
Phrase:	 Car maintenance
Question:	 Is regular car maintenance important?
Complete declarative	 Maintaining your car regularly can ensure
sentence:	 that it provides reliable transportation.
The phrase car maintenance is really a topic, not a central idea. It does not
say anything about car maintenance. The question “Is regular car maintenance
important?” is more complete but does not reveal whether the speaker is going
to support the affirmative or the negative answer. By the time you word your
central idea, you should be ready to summarize your stand on your topic in a
complete declarative sentence.
Direct, Specific Language
The central idea should use direct, specific language rather than qualifiers and
vague generalities.
Qualified language:	
In my opinion, censorship of school textbooks threat-
ens the rights of schoolchildren.
Direct language:	
Censorship of school textbooks threatens the rights of
schoolchildren.
Vague language:	
A 2012 hurricane affected the northeastern United
States.
Specific language:	
When Superstorm Sandy struck the coast of the
northeastern United States in October 2012, it killed
hundreds of people, caused billions of dollars in
property damage, and closed the New York Stock
Exchange for two days.
A Single Idea
The central idea should be a single idea.
Two ideas:	
Deforestation by lumber interests and toxic-waste dumping are
major environmental problems in the United States today.
One idea:	
Toxic-waste dumping is a major environmental problem in the
United States today.
More than one central idea, like more than one idea in a purpose statement,
only leads to confusion and lack of coherence in a speech.
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 145 07/11/14 12:25 PM
146 Developing Your Speech
7.4
An Audience-Centered Idea
The central idea should reflect consideration of the audience. You considered
your audience when selecting and narrowing your topic and when composing
your purpose statement. In the same way, you should consider your audience’s
needs, interests, expectations, and knowledge when stating your central idea.
If you do not consider your listeners, you run the risk of losing their attention
before you even begin developing the speech. If your audience consists mainly
of college juniors and seniors, the second of the following central ideas would be
better suited to your listeners than the first.
Inappropriate:	
Scholarships from a variety of sources are readily available
to first-year college students.
Appropriate:	
Although you might think of scholarships as a source of
money for freshmen, a number of scholarships are available
only to students who have completed their first year of
college.
Generate and Preview Your Main
Ideas
7.4	 Apply three ways of generating main ideas from a central idea.
Next to selecting a topic, probably the most common stumbling block in devel-
oping speeches is coming up with a speech plan.
Generating Your Main Ideas
Trying to decide how to subdivide your central idea into two, three, or four key
points, or main ideas—detailed points of focus that help you develop your cen-
tral idea—can make you chew your pencil, scratch your head, and end up as
you began, with a blank sheet of paper. The task will be much easier if you use
the three-question strategy described in the How To box. Let’s see this technique
at work with several central idea statements.
FINDING LOGICAL DIVISIONS  Suppose your central idea is “A liberal arts
education benefits the student in two ways.” You now turn to the three ques-
tions. But for this example, you needn’t go beyond the first one. Does the central
idea have logical divisions? The phrase “two ways” indicates that it does. You
can logically divide your speech into ways in which the student benefits:
 1.	Appreciation of culture
 2.	Concern for humankind
A brief brainstorming session then could help you to come up with more spe-
cific examples of ways in which a liberal arts education might benefit students.
7.4
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 146 07/11/14 12:25 PM
147
Generate and Preview Your Main Ideas 7.4
At this stage, you needn’t worry about Roman numerals, parallel form, or
even the order in which the main ideas are listed. We will discuss these and
other features of outlining in Chapter 9. Your goal now is simply to generate
ideas.
Just because you write them down, don’t think that the ideas you come up
with now are engraved in stone. They can—and probably will—change. After
all, this is a preliminary plan. It may undergo many revisions before you actually
deliver your speech. For example, your speech might have four points, but four
points might well prove to be too many to develop in the brief time allowed for
most classroom speeches. Because it is much easier to eliminate ideas than to
invent them, list them all for now.
ESTABLISHING REASONS  Suppose your central idea is “Upholstered furni-
ture fires are a life-threatening hazard.”10 Asking yourself whether this idea has
logical divisions is no help at all. There are no key phrases indicating logical
divisions—no “ways,” “means,” “types,” or “methods” appear in the wording.
The second question, however, is more productive: Having done some initial
reading on the topic, you can think of reasons this central idea is true. Asking
yourself “Why?” after stating your central idea yields three answers:
 1.	Standards to reduce fires caused by smoldering cigarettes have lulled furni-
ture makers into a false sense of security.
 2.	Government officials refuse to force the furniture industry to reexamine its
standards.
 3.	Consumers are largely ignorant of the risks.
Notice that these main ideas are expressed in complete sentences, whereas
the ones in the preceding example were in phrases. At this stage, it doesn’t mat-
ter. What does matter is getting your ideas written down. You can rewrite and
reorganize them later.
Determine Your Main Ideas
	1.	
Write your central idea at the top of a clean sheet of paper or computer screen.
	2.	
Ask yourself the following three questions. You should be able to answer yes to one or
more of these questions:
•	 Does the central idea have logical divisions?  These may be indicated by such phrases
as “three types” or “four means.”
•	 Are there several reasons why the central idea is true?
•	 Can I support the central idea with a series of steps or a chronological progression?
	3.	
Write down the divisions, reasons, or steps you thought of. These will become the main
ideas of your speech.
HOW
TO
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 147 07/11/14 12:25 PM
148 Developing Your Speech
7.4
TRACING SPECIFIC STEPS  “NASA’s space shuttle program resulted in both
great achievement and tragic failure.” You stare glumly at the central idea that
you so carefully formulated yesterday. Now what? You know a lot about the
subject; your aerospace science professor has covered it thoroughly this semes-
ter. But how can you organize all the information you have? Again, you turn to
the three-question method.
Does the main idea have logical divisions? You scan the sentence hopefully,
but you can find no key phrases suggesting logical divisions.
Can you think of several reasons the central idea is true? You read the central
idea again and ask “Why?” at the end of it. Answering that question may indeed
produce a plan for a speech, one in which you would talk about the reasons for
the achievements and failures. But your purpose statement reads, “At the end
of my speech, the audience will be able to trace the history of the space shuttle.”
Giving reasons for the space shuttle program’s achievements and failures would
not directly contribute to your purpose. So you turn to the third question.
Can you support your central idea with a series of steps? You can generate
main ideas for a speech about almost any historical topic, or any topic requir-
ing a chronological progression (for example, topics of how-to speeches), by an-
swering the third question. You therefore decide that your main ideas will be a
chronology of important space shuttle flights:11
 1.	April 1981: Test flight of the space shuttle.
 2.	January 1986: Shuttle Challenger explodes on launch.
 3.	April 1990: Deployment of the Hubble Space Telescope.
 4.	October–November 1998: Flight of John Glenn, age 77, who had been the
first American in orbit in 1962.
 5.	May–June 1999: Shuttle Discovery docks with the International Space
Station.
 6.	February 2003: Shuttle Columbia disintegrates on re-entry.
 7.	July 2011: Shuttle Endeavour makes the program’s final flight.
You know that you can add to, eliminate, or reorganize these ideas later. But
you have a start.
Notice that for this last example, you consulted your purpose statement as
you generated your main ideas. If these main ideas do not help you to achieve
your purpose, you need to rethink your speech. You may finally change either
your purpose or your main ideas; but whichever you do, you need to synchro-
nize them. Remember, it is much easier to make changes at this point than after
you have done your research and produced a detailed outline.
Previewing Your Main Ideas
Once you have generated your main ideas, you can add a preview of those main
ideas to your central idea to produce a blueprint for your speech, a statement of
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 148 07/11/14 12:25 PM
149
Meanwhile, Back at the Computer . . . 7.5
your central idea plus a preview of your main ideas. Some speakers, like Nicole,
integrate their central idea and preview into one blueprint sentence:
Obsolete computers are straining landfills because they contain hazard-
ous materials and take a distinctively long time to decay.12
In this example, Nicole started with a central idea: “Obsolete computers are
straining landfills.” Asking herself “Why?” yielded two reasons, which became
her two main points: “They contain hazardous materials” and “They take a dis-
tinctively long time to decay.” Combining these reasons with her central idea
produced a blueprint. Like Nicole, you should preview the ideas in the same
order in which you plan to discuss them in the speech.
Other speakers, like Patrick, in his speech on the problems associated with
mining oil by hydraulic fracturing, state their blueprints in several sentences:
In order to understand the fundamental threat fracturing poses, we must
first understand the dangers at each step of the process. Second, expose
the corrupt legal maneuvering that protects it. And, finally, champion
the simple solution that will save American lives.13
Patrick also started with a central idea: Fracturing poses a fundamental
threat. Like Nicole, he generated reasons for his central idea, which in this case
were “dangers at each step of the process” and “corrupt legal maneuvering that
protects it.” He decided at this early point in the speech to mention that there is a
“simple solution that will save American lives.” Thinking that a single sentence
might become unwieldy, Patrick decided to use three shorter sentences for his
blueprint.
Meanwhile, Back at the Computer . . .
It’s been a while since we left Ed Garcia, the student in the opening paragraphs
of this chapter, struggling to write a speech on college football. Even though he
has procrastinated, if he follows the steps we have discussed, he should still be
able to plan a successful informative speech.
Ed has already chosen his topic. His audience is likely to be interested in
his subject. Because Ed is a varsity defensive tackle, the audience will probably
expect him to talk about college football. And he himself is passionately inter-
ested in and knowledgeable about the subject. It meets all the requirements of a
successful topic.
But the topic “college football” is too broad for a three- to five-minute talk.
Ed needs to narrow his topic to a manageable size. He goes online to Yahoo!
Directory and clicks on the category Recreation Sports, then on Sports. He is just
about to select College and University when another category catches his eye:
Medicine. Sports medicine? Hmmmm. . . . Ed has suffered several injuries and
feels qualified to talk about this aspect of football. Ed doesn’t need to go further.
He has his topic: “Injuries in college football.”
7.5
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 149 07/11/14 12:25 PM
150 Developing Your Speech
7.5
Now that he has narrowed the topic, Ed needs a purpose statement. He
decides that his audience might know something about how players are injured,
but they probably do not know how these injuries are treated. He types, “The
audience will be able to explain how the three most common injuries suffered by
college football players are treated.”
A few minutes later, Ed derives his central idea from his purpose: “Sports
medicine specialists have developed specific courses of treatment for the three
most common kinds of injuries suffered by college football players.”
Generating main ideas is also fairly easy now. Because his central idea men-
tions three kinds of injuries, he can plan his speech around those three ideas
(logical divisions). Under the central idea Ed lists three injuries:
 1.	Bruises
 2.	Broken bones
 3.	Ligament and cartilage damage
Now Ed has a plan and is well on his way to developing a successful three-
to five-minute informative speech.
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 150 07/11/14 12:25 PM
151
CHAPTER 7  STUDY GUIDE
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
7.1	 Select and narrow a topic for a speech that is appropriate to the
audience, the occasion, the time limits, and yourself.
When you must select your own topic, keep in mind the interests, expectations,
and knowledge levels of the audience. Choose an important topic. Consider the
special demands of the occasion. Be sure to take into account your own interests,
abilities, and experiences. If you are still undecided, brainstorming strategies,
such as consulting the media or scanning Web directories for potential topics,
may give you topic ideas. After choosing a broad topic area, narrow the topic so
that it fits within your time limits.
Key Term
Brainstorming
7.2	 Write an audience-centered specific-purpose statement for a speech.
Your general purpose for speaking will be to inform, to persuade, or to enter-
tain your listeners. Your specific purpose should state, in observable terms, what
your audience will do at the end of the speech.
Key Terms
General purpose Specific purpose Behavioral objective
7.3	 State a single audience-centered central idea with direct, specific
language in a complete declarative sentence.
In contrast to your specific-purpose statement, which indicates what you want
the audience to be able to do, your central idea summarizes what you, the speaker
will say. The central idea should be a single idea, stated in a complete declarative
sentence. Be direct and specific without using qualifiers.
Key Term
Central idea
7.4	 Apply three ways of generating main ideas from a central idea.
To generate main ideas, determine whether the central idea (1) has logical divi-
sions, (2) can be supported by several reasons, or (3) can be traced through a
series of steps. Preview your central idea and your main ideas in the blueprint of
your speech and summarize the blueprint in your conclusion.
Key Terms
Main ideas
Blueprint
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 151 07/11/14 12:25 PM
152 CHAPTER 7  STUDY GUIDE
Think about These Questions
•	 A candidate for governor visits your public-speaking class and talks for
thirty minutes on the topic “Why the state should increase funding of pub-
lic transportation.” Analyze the candidate’s choice of topic according to the
guidelines presented in this chapter.
•	 Consider the following specific-purpose statements. Analyze each accord-
ing to the criteria presented in this chapter. Rewrite the statements to cor-
rect any problems.
“At the end of my speech, the audience will know more about the Mexi-
can Free-Tailed Bat.”
“I will explain some differences between Asian and Western cultures in
nonverbal communication.”
“At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to list some reasons
for xeriscaping one’s yard.”
“The advantages and disadvantages of living in a college dormitory.”
“At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to prepare a realistic
monthly budget.”
•	 Below are the topic, general purpose, and specific purpose that Marylin has
chosen for her speech. Use the advice in this chapter to write an appropri-
ate central idea and main ideas for the speech.
Topic: America’s crumbling roads and bridges
General purpose: To persuade
Specific purpose: At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to
list and explain three reasons America should invest in its roads and
bridges.
M07_BEEB3981_05_SE_C07_131-152.indd 152 07/11/14 12:25 PM
153
Chapter 8
Gathering and Using
Supporting Material
“Learn, compare,
collect the facts!
. . . Always have
the courage to say
to yourself—I am
ignorant.”
—Ivan Petrovich
Pavlov
	8.1	Sources of Supporting Material
Personal Knowledge and
Experience
The Internet
Online Databases
Traditional Library Holdings
Interviews
	8.2	Research Strategies
Develop a Preliminary Biography
Locate Resources
Assess the Usefulness of Resources
Take Notes
Identify Possible Presentation Aids
Outline
(continued)
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 153 07/11/14 2:08 PM
154 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.1
Learning Objectives
	8.1	List five potential sources of supporting material for a speech.
	8.2	Explain five strategies for a methodical research process.
	8.3	List and describe six types of supporting material.
	8.4	List and explain six criteria for determining the best supporting
material to use in a speech.
Apple pie is your specialty. Your family and friends relish your flaky crust, spicy
filling, and crunchy crumb topping. Fortunately, not only do you have a never-
fail recipe and technique, but you also know where to go for the best ingredients.
Fette’s Orchard has the tangiest pie apples in town. For your crust, you use only
Premier shortening, which you buy at Meyer’s Specialty Market. Your crumb
topping requires both stone-ground whole-wheat flour and fresh creamery but-
ter, available on Tuesdays at the farmer’s market on the courthouse square.
Just as making your apple pie requires that you know where to find spe-
cific ingredients, creating a successful speech requires knowledge of sources, re-
search strategies, and types of supporting material that speechmakers typically
use. This chapter covers the speech-development step highlighted in Figure 8.1:
Gather Supporting Material.
Sources of Supporting Material
8.1	 List five potential sources of supporting material for a speech.
Supporting material for your speech can come from a variety of sources, includ-
ing personal knowledge and experience, the Internet, online databases, tradi-
tional library holdings, and interviews.
Personal Knowledge and Experience
Because you will probably give speeches on topics in which you are particularly
interested, you may find that you are your own best source. Your speech may be
on a skill or hobby about which you are knowledgeable, such as raising tropical
8.1
	8.3	Types of Supporting Material
Illustrations
Descriptions and Explanations
Definitions
Analogies
Statistics
Opinions
	8.4	The Best Supporting Material
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 154 07/11/14 2:08 PM
155
Sources of Supporting Material 8.1
fish, stenciling, or stamp collecting. Or you might talk on a subject with which
you have had some personal experience, such as buying a used car, deciding
whether to join a club, or seeking assisted living for an elderly relative.
It is true that most well-researched speeches include some objective material
gathered from outside sources. But you may also be able to provide an effec-
tive illustration, explanation, definition, or other type of support from your own
knowledge and experience. As an audience-centered speaker, you should realize,
too, that personal knowledge often has the additional advantage of heightening
your credibility in the minds of your listeners. They will accord you more respect
as an authority when they realize that you have firsthand knowledge of a topic.
The Internet
When facing a research task, most people turn first to the Internet. Understand-
ing the World Wide Web, the Internet’s primary delivery system; the tools for
accessing it; and some of the amazing types of information available can help to
make your research more productive.
Generate
Main Ideas
Select and
Narrow
Topic
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Deliver
Speech
Figure 8.1  Finding, identifying, and effectively using
supporting material are activities that comprise an essential
step of the speech-preparation process.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 155 07/11/14 2:08 PM
156 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.1
LOCATING INTERNET RESOURCES  You have undoubtedly used Google to
access material on the Web. If you feel overwhelmed by the number of sites a
Google search can yield, a specialized vertical search engine, a Web site that
indexes World Wide Web information in a specific field, can help you to narrow
your search. For example, Google Scholar indexes academic sources, and Indeed
indexes job Web sites.
Another strategy that can help you to narrow your search is a Boolean
search, which allows you to enclose phrases in quotation marks or parenthe-
ses so that a search yields only those sites on which all words of the phrase
appear in that order, rather than sites that contain the words at random. Boolean
searches also permit you to insert “AND” or “+” between words and phrases
to indicate that you wish to see results that contain both phrases, and similarly,
they let you exclude certain words and phrases from your search. They also let
you restrict the dates of your hits so that you see only documents posted within
a specified time frame. These relatively simple strategies can help you to narrow
a list of hits from, in some cases, millions of sites to a more workable number.
EXPLORING INTERNET RESOURCES  As you go to the Web sites you have
located, you will probably find a wide variety—from sites that try to sell you
something to the official sites of government agencies and news organizations.
One clue to the type of site you have found is the domain, indicated by the last
three letters of the site’s URL (for example, .com or .org).
Although sites can be classified in a number of different ways, most Web
sites fall into one of the following categories.1
•	 Commercial. The purpose of this type of Web site is to sell products or serv­
ices. The domain is usually .com.
•	 Country codes. Web sites from countries other than the United States include
a country code. For example, Great Britain is .uk and Canada is .ca.
•	 Educational. This type of site provides information about an educational en-
tity. The domain is usually .edu.
•	 Entertainment. Internet addresses ending with .com may indicate entertain-
ment Web sites.
•	 Government. The purpose of this type of Web site is to provide information
produced by government agencies, offices, and departments. The domain is
usually .gov.
•	 Military. Information about or from the military is usually indicated by
Internet addresses that end in .mil.
•	 News. Web sites that provide information about current events usually have
the domain .com.
•	 Organizational. The purpose of this type of Web site is to advocate a group’s
point of view. The domain is usually .org.
•	 Personal. Information about or from an individual may be indicated by a
variety of Internet addresses.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 156 07/11/14 2:08 PM
157
Sources of Supporting Material 8.1
EVALUATING INTERNET RESOURCES  Although the Web was founded on
the principle of free speech, the lack of legal, financial, or editorial restrictions on
what is published on the Web presents both a logistical and an ethical challenge
to researchers.
As you begin to explore the sites that you discover, you need to evaluate
them according to a consistent standard. The six criteria in Table 8.1 can serve
as such a standard.2 The first four criteria can serve as guides to evaluating any
resource, regardless of whether it is a Web site, a print document, or even infor-
mation that you obtain in an interview.
No discussion of evaluating Internet resources would be complete with
mentioning Wikipedia, the resource that often appears as the first hit from a Web
search. Wikipedia can be useful, especially for general information about current
events and new technology that may not find its way into print resources for
Table 8.1  Six Criteria for Evaluating Internet Resources
Criterion Applying the Criterion Drawing Conclusions
Accountability: Who is
responsible for the site?
•	 The individual or organization responsible for the site may
be clear from the title of the site and/or its URL.
•	 See whether the site is signed.
•	 Follow links or search the author’s name to determine the
author’s expertise and authority.
•	 If the site is unsigned, search for a sponsoring organiza-
tion. Follow links, search the organization’s name, or
consider the domain to determine the reputability.
•	 If you cannot identify or verify the
author or sponsor, be wary of
the site.
Accuracy: Is the
information correct?
•	 Consider whether the author or sponsor is a credible
authority.
•	 Assess the care with which the site has been written.
•	 Conduct additional research into the information you find
on the site.
•	 If the author or sponsor is a cred-
ible authority, the information is
more likely to be accurate.
•	 A site should be relatively free of
writing errors.
•	 You may be able to verify or refute
the information by consulting
another resource.
Objectivity: Is the site
free of bias?
•	 Consider the interests, philosophical or political biases,
and source of financial support of the author and/or
sponsor of the site.
•	 Does the site include advertisements that might influence
its content?
•	 The more objective the author
and sponsor of the site are, the
more credible their information
may be.
Timeliness: Is the site
current?
•	 Look at the bottom of the site for a statement telling
when the site was posted and when it was last updated.
•	 If you cannot find a date on the site, click on Page Info
(from the Tools menu at the top of your browser screen)
to find a “Last Modified” date.
•	 Enter the title of the site in a search engine. The resulting
information should include a date.
•	 In general, when you are con-
cerned with factual data, the
more recent, the better.
Usability: Do the layout
and design of the site
facilitate its use?
•	 Does the site load fairly quickly?
•	 Is a fee required to gain access to any of the information
on the site?
•	 Balance graphics and any fees
against practical efficiency.
Diversity: Is the site
inclusive?
•	 Do language and graphics reflect and respect differences
in gender, ethnicity, race, and sexual orientation?
•	 Do interactive forums invite divergent perspectives?
•	 Is the site friendly to people with disabilities (e.g., does it
offer a large-print or video option)?
•	 A site should be free of bias,
representative of diverse perspec-
tives, and accessible by people
with disabilities.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 157 07/11/14 2:08 PM
158 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.1
years. But users need to keep in mind that anyone, regardless of his or her exper-
tise, can add to or change the content of any entry, thereby limiting Wikipedia’s
reliability and its appropriateness for academic use.
Later in this chapter we provide additional criteria to help you make your
final selection of supporting material from both electronic and print resources.
Online Databases
Online databases provide access to bibliographic information, abstracts, and
full texts for a variety of resources, including periodicals, newspapers, govern-
ment documents, and even books. Like Web sites, online databases are reached
via a networked computer. Unlike Web sites, however, most databases are re-
stricted to patrons of libraries that subscribe to them. The How To box tells you
how to locate and search most online databases.
Many online databases that began as computerized indexes now provide
access to full texts of the resources themselves. Your library may subscribe to
several or all of these popular full-text databases:
•	 ABA/Inform Global. This resource offers many full-text articles in business
and trade publications from 1971 to the present.
•	 Academic Search Complete. This popular database offers many full-text
articles from 1865 to the present, covering a wide variety of subjects.
•	 JSTOR. This is a multi-subject, full-text database of journal articles from the
first volume to the present.
•	 LexisNexis Academic. Focusing on business, industry, and law, this database
provides many full-text articles from newspapers, magazines, journals,
newsletters, and wire services. Dates of coverage vary.
•	 Newspaper Source. This database offers many full-text articles from more
than 40 U.S. and international newspapers; more than 330 full-text television
Find and Use Online Databases
•	 Go to your library’s homepage, and log in with your username and password.
•	 Determine the available databases.  Databases are usually listed according to type and/or
subjects, as well as alphabetically.
•	 Search the database.  Each database opens with a search box, into which you type relevant
information such as keywords and date ranges. Most also allow Boolean and other types of
advanced searches.
•	 Multiply your search.  In some cases, you may be able to search more than one database at
a time by searching providers that offer access to multiple databases. ProQuest, for example,
provides databases of alternative newspapers, criminal justice periodicals, doctoral disserta-
tions, and education journals as well as its popular ABI/INFORM Global database of business
and finance publications.
HOW
TO
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 158 07/11/14 2:08 PM
159
Sources of Supporting Material 8.1
and radio news transcripts from CBS News, CNN, CNN international, FOX
News, NPR, and others; and selected full-text articles from more than 330
regional (U.S.) newspapers.
Traditional Library Holdings
Despite the rapid development of the Internet and database resources, the more
traditional holdings of libraries, both paper and electronic, remain rich sources
of supporting material.
LOCATING TRADITIONAL LIBRARY HOLDINGS  Spend some time becom-
ing familiar with your library’s layout and services so that you know how to
access books and reference materials. Many encyclopedias, dictionaries, directo-
ries, atlases, almanacs, yearbooks, books of quotations, and biographical diction-
aries are not available online. But if you are not able to find a specific reference
online, you may be able to locate a print version by using your library’s card
catalog. You can access the computerized card catalog of most libraries from
your own computer before you ever enter the library. As shown in Figure 8.2,
the catalog will supply each book’s call number, which you will need in order to
find the book.
EXPLORING TRADITIONAL LIBRARY HOLDINGS  Once you have the call
number, you are ready to venture into the library to obtain the item you want.
Figure 8.2 A computerized card catalog entry for a book. The same entry appears on the screen
regardless of whether the book is accessed using title, author, or subject.
Courtesy of Albert B. Alkek Library, Texas State University.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 159 07/11/14 2:08 PM
160 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.1
It is a good idea to become familiar with your library’s layout before you have to
do research under the pressure of a deadline.
•	 Books. Libraries’ collections of books are called the stacks. The stacks are
­
organized by call numbers, which are available on card-catalog entries.
Many libraries offer a location guide or map to guide you to the floor or
­
section of the stacks that houses the books with the call numbers in which
you are interested.
Do not wait until the last minute to conduct library research for your
speech. Increasing numbers of libraries are beginning to house some of their
stacks off-site, meaning that you may have to fill out a request form and al-
low some wait time before a book becomes available to you.
•	 Reference resources. In a library’s card catalog, the call numbers of print refer-
ence resources will have the prefix ref, indicating that they are housed in the
reference section of the library. Print reference resources are usually avail-
able only for in-house research and cannot be checked out.
Reference librarians are specialists in the field of information science.
They are often able to suggest additional print or electronic resources that
you might otherwise overlook. If you plan to use the reference section, visit
the library during daytime working hours. A full-time reference librarian is
more likely to be on hand and available to help you at that time than in the
evenings or on weekends.
Quick Check
Supporting Material in the Library
Library resources may include
•	 Books
•	 Periodicals
•	 Online databases
•	 Newspapers
•	 Reference resources
Interviews
When you don’t know the answers to some of the important questions raised
by your speech topic but you can think of someone who might, consider inter-
viewing that person to get material for your speech. For example, if you want to
discuss the pros and cons of building a new prison in an urban area, you might
interview an official of the correctional service, a representative of the city ad-
ministration, and a resident of the area. Or if you want to explain why Al Gore
lost the 2000 presidential election, even though he won the popular vote, you
might consult a professor of political science or American history.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 160 07/11/14 2:08 PM
161
Sources of Supporting Material 8.1
Before you decide that an interview is necessary, be sure that your questions
cannot be answered easily by looking at a Web site or reading a newspaper article
or a book. Do some preliminary reading on your subject before you decide to take
up someone’s valuable time in an interview. If you decide that only an interview
can give you the material you need, you should prepare for it in advance.
PREPARING FOR THE INTERVIEW
•	 Determine your purpose. The first step in preparing for an interview is to es-
tablish a purpose or objective for it. Specifically, what do you need to find
out? Do you need hard facts that you cannot obtain from other sources? Do
you need the interviewee’s expert testimony on your subject? Or do you
need an explanation of some of the information that you have found in print
sources?
•	 Schedule the interview. Once you have a specific purpose for the interview
and have decided whom you need to speak with, arrange a meeting. Tele-
phone or email the person, explain briefly who you are and why you are
contacting him or her, and ask for an appointment. Most people are flattered
to have their authority and knowledge recognized and willingly grant inter-
views to serious students if schedules permit.
If you are considering audio or video recording of the interview, ask
for the interviewee’s okay during this initial contact. If the person does not
want to be recorded, you will need to be prepared to gather your informa-
tion without electronic assistance.
•	 Plan your questions. Before your interview, find out as much as you can about
both your subject and the person you are interviewing. Prepare questions
that take full advantage of the interviewee’s specific knowledge of your
subject. You can do this only if you already know a good deal about your
subject.
It is also helpful to think about how you should combine the two basic
types of interview questions: closed-ended and open-ended. Open-ended
questions often follow closed-ended questions. If the person you are inter-
viewing answers a closed-ended question with a simple yes or no, you might
wish to follow up by asking “Why?”
CONDUCTING THE INTERVIEW
•	 On your mark . . . Dress appropriately for the interview. For most interviews,
conservative, businesslike clothes show that you are serious about the inter-
view and that you respect the norms of your interviewee’s world.
Take paper and pen or pencil for note-taking. Even if you are planning to
record the interview, you may want to turn the recording device off at some
point during the interview, so you’ll need an alternative. Or Murphy’s Law
may disable your device. Ensure that the interview can continue, in spite of
any mishap.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 161 07/11/14 2:08 PM
162 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.2
•	 Get set . . . Arrive for the interview a few minutes ahead of schedule. Be pre-
pared, however, to wait patiently, if necessary.
Once you are settled with the person you will interview, remind him or
her of your purpose. If you are familiar with and admire the work the inter-
viewee has done or published, don’t hesitate to say so. Sincere flattery can
help to set a positive tone for the exchange. If you have decided to record the
interview and the person has agreed, set up your device. You may keep it out
of sight once the interviewee has seen it, but never try to hide a recorder at
the outset—such a ploy is unethical. If you are going to take written notes,
get out your paper and pen. Now you are ready to begin asking your pre-
pared questions.
•	 Go! As you conduct the interview, use the questions that you have prepared
as a guide but not as a rigid schedule. If the person you are interviewing
mentions an interesting angle that you had not thought of, don’t be afraid to
pursue the point. Listen carefully to the person’s answers, and ask for clari-
fication of any ideas you don’t understand. Television journalist Charles
Osgood advises interviewers,
Don’t just listen for the words and their cognitive, literal meanings, but
listen for the connotations. You will learn something if you do that and
the next question will come to you growing out of what you just learned.3
Do not prolong the interview beyond the time limits of your appoint-
ment. The person you are interviewing is probably very busy and has been
courteous enough to fit you into a tight schedule. Ending the interview on
time is simply returning the courtesy. Thank your interviewee for his or her
contribution and leave.
FOLLOWING UP THE INTERVIEW  As soon as possible after the interview,
read through your notes carefully, and revise any portions that may be illegible
or unclear. If you recorded the interview, label the recording with the date and
the interviewee’s name.
Research Strategies
8.2	 Explain five strategies for a methodical research process.
You have Internet access. You know the kinds of materials and services your
library offers and how to use them. In short, you’re ready to begin researching
your speech. But unless you approach this next phase of speech preparation sys-
tematically, you may find yourself wasting a good deal of time and energy re-
tracing steps to find bits of information that you remember seeing but forgot to
bookmark, print out, or write down the first time.
Methodical research strategies can make your efforts easier and more efficient.
You need to develop a preliminary bibliography, locate potential resources, evaluate
their usefulness of resources, take notes, and identify possible presentation aids.
8.2
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 162 07/11/14 2:08 PM
163
Research Strategies 8.2
Develop a Preliminary Bibliography
Creating a preliminary bibliography, or list of promising potential resources,
should be your first research goal. You will probably discover more resources
than you actually look at or refer to in your speech; at this stage, the bibliogra-
phy simply serves as a menu of possibilities. How many resources should you
list in a preliminary bibliography for, say, a ten-minute speech? A reasonable
number might be ten or twelve. If you have many more than that, you may feel
overwhelmed. If you have fewer, you may find too little information.
You will need to develop a system for keeping track of your resources. Web
browsers let you bookmark pages for future reference and ready access; your
bookmarks can serve as one part of your preliminary bibliography. If you are us-
ing an online catalog or database, you can probably compile and then print out
a record of the references you discover. Such files can be a second part of your
preliminary bibliography.
Locate Resources
You should have no trouble obtaining the actual texts of resources from the Web
and online databases. For all other items in your preliminary bibliography, you
will need to locate the resources yourself. Use the discussion earlier in this chap-
ter on traditional library holdings to help you.
Assess the Usefulness of Resources
It makes sense to gauge the potential usefulness of your resources before you
begin to read more closely and take notes. Think critically about how the various
resources you have found are likely to help you achieve your purpose and about
how effective they are likely to be with your audience. Glance over the tables of
contents of books, and flip quickly through the texts to note any charts, graphs,
or other visual materials that might be used as visual aids. Skim a key chapter or
two. Skim articles and Web sites as well.
Take Notes
Once you have located and assessed the usefulness of your resources, you are
ready to begin more careful reading and note-taking. The How To box offers
some tips.
Identify Possible Presentation Aids
In addition to discovering verbal supporting material in your sources, you may also
find charts, graphs, photographs, and other potentially valuable visual material.
You might think that you will be able to remember what visuals were in
which sources. But many speakers have experienced frustrating searches for that
“perfect” presentation aid they remember seeing somewhere while they were
taking notes for their speech. Even if you are not certain at this point that you
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 163 07/11/14 2:08 PM
164 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.3
will even use presentation aids in your speech, it can’t hurt to print out, photo-
copy, and/or print out any good possibilities, recording those sources of infor-
mation just as you did for your written materials. Then, when the time comes to
consider whether and where presentation aids might enhance the speech, you
will have some readily at hand. In Chapter 14, we discuss types of presentation
aids and provide guidelines for their use.
Take Effective Notes from Your Sources
•	 Begin with the resources that you think have the greatest potential.
•	 Record any examples, statistics, opinions, or other supporting material that might be useful
to your speech. Depending on the resources, you can photocopy them, cut and past them or
save them into a computer file, and/or print them out.
•	 If you copy a phrase, sentence, or paragraph verbatim from a source, be sure to put quotation
marks around it. You might need to know later whether it was a direct quote or a paraphrase.
(This information will be obvious, of course, on printouts or photocopies.)
•	 Record the source of the supporting material. In Chapter 4, we discuss the ethical importance
of crediting all sources of ideas and information. If you consistently record your sources when
you take notes, you will avoid the possibility of committing unintentional plagiarism.
How
To
Quick Check
Research Strategies
•	 Develop a preliminary bibliography.
•	 Locate materials.
•	 Assess the potential usefulness of sources.
•	 Take notes.
•	 Identify possible presentation aids.
Types of Supporting Material
8.3	 List and describe six types of supporting material.
Once you have discovered likely sources, developed a preliminary bibliography
of those sources, read them, assessed their usefulness, taken notes, and identi-
fied possible presentation aids, you are ready to make decisions about how to
use your information to best advantage. You will need to look at your speech
from your audience members’ perspective and decide where an explanation
might help them to understand a point, where statistics might convince them
8.3
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 164 11/17/14 12:11 PM
165
Types of Supporting Material 8.3
of the significance of a problem, and where an illustration might stir their emo-
tions. Next, we will discuss these and other types of supporting material and
present guidelines for using them effectively.
Illustrations
Novelist Michael Cunningham often reads to standing-room-only crowds. He
explains the appeal of such live readings in this way: “It’s very much about
storytelling . . . you’re all gathered around the campfire—‘I’m going to tell you
about these people, and what happened to them.’”4 Cunningham is right. A
story or anecdote—an illustration—almost always guarantees audience inter-
est by appealing to their emotions. “Stories get you out of your head and into
your gut” is how one professional speech coach explains the universal appeal of
illustrations.5
Let’s look more closely at different kinds of illustrations and examine some
guidelines for using them.
BRIEF ILLUSTRATIONS A brief illustration is an unelaborated example that
is often no longer than a sentence or two. In a speech to the United Nations, Sec-
retary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton offered this brief illustration of women
making a difference:
In South Africa, women living in shantytowns came together to build
a housing development outside Cape Town all on their own, brick by
brick. And today, their community has grown to more than 50,000 homes
for low-income families, most of them female-headed.6
It is often helpful to use multiple brief illustrations. Sometimes, a series of
brief illustrations can have more impact than either a single brief illustration or
a more detailed extended illustration. In addition, although an audience could
dismiss a single illustration as an exception, two or more illustrations strongly
suggest a trend or norm.
EXTENDED ILLUSTRATIONS  Longer and more detailed than the brief illus-
tration, the extended illustration resembles a story. It is more vividly descriptive
than a brief illustration, and it has a plot—an opening, complications, a climax,
and a resolution. Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd told this moving story
of two British sisters who were forcibly taken to Australia under a Child Mi-
grants Program in the 1950s:
Judy remembers the day they were first taken to the home and her sister
Robyn bolted from the gate and ran away.
They later found her and dragged her back.
Robyn and Judy remember that they kept waiting and waiting for
just someone, someone to come and pick them up—but no-one, no-one
ever came.
They recall being hit with belt buckles and bamboo.
They said the place they grew up in was utterly, utterly loveless.7
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 165 07/11/14 2:08 PM
166 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.3
To use an extended illustration takes more time than citing a brief example, but
longer stories can be more dramatic and emotionally compelling. As we discuss
in Chapter 10, extended illustrations can work well as speech introductions. And
Chapter 15 considers the use of extended illustrations in informative speeches.
HYPOTHETICAL ILLUSTRATIONS  Hypothetical illustrations describe situ-
ations or events that have not actually occurred. Rather, they are scenarios that
might happen. Plausible hypothetical illustrations enable your audience to imag-
ine themselves in a particular situation. The following hypothetical illustration
comes from a speech on how cell phone technology can change communication
in developing countries:
Imagine someone in China or Africa who is gaining access to e-mail for
the first time, how it will improve [his or her] efficiency and ability to
connect with others.8
Notice the word imagine in this illustration. The purpose of a hypothetical il-
lustration is not to trick your listeners into believing a bogus story. As Chapter 4
describes, ethical speakers make their listeners aware from the beginning that
the illustration is hypothetical.
USING ILLUSTRATIONS EFFECTIVELY  Illustrations are almost guaranteed at-
tention getters, as well as a way to support your statements. But even this excel-
lent form of support can be ineffective if not used to its best advantage. The How
To box offers ideas to help you use illustrations more effectively in your speeches.
Use Illustrations in Your Speech
•	 Be sure that your illustrations are relevant to what they are supposed to support. 
•	 Choose illustrations that represent a trend.  It is not ethical to find one or two isolated illustra-
tions and use them as though they were typical. If your illustrations are rare instances, you owe
it to your listeners to tell them so.
•	 Make your illustrations vivid and specific.  If you have chosen to tell a poignant story, give it
plenty of detail so that it will come alive in the minds of your listeners. Paint a mental picture of
the people, places, and things involved.
•	 Use illustrations with which your listeners can identify.  The best illustrations are the ones that
your listeners can imagine experiencing themselves. Other compelling stories, such as a tale
from a person who survived a disaster, can illustrate such great human drama that everyone
listening will be immediately interested and attentive.
•	 Remember that the best illustrations are personal ones.  Speakers gain conviction and enthu-
siasm when they talk about personal experiences. For example, one speaker gained additional
respect from the audience for her speech on decriminalizing drug addiction when she revealed
that the man whose addiction she profiled in her speech was her own father.9 If you have had
personal experience with the subject on which you are speaking, be sure to describe that
experience to the audience.
HOW
TO
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 166 07/11/14 2:08 PM
167
Types of Supporting Material 8.3
Descriptions and Explanations
Probably the most commonly used forms of support are descriptions and ex-
planations. A description provides the details that allow audience members to
develop mental images of what a speaker is talking about. An explanation is a
statement that makes clear how something is done or why it exists in its present
form or existed in its past form.
DESCRIBING
Write for the eye, the ear, the nose, and all the senses. In other words, be
as vivid as you possibly can.10
This advice from a professional speechwriter acknowledges that, in effect, de-
scription creates images that allow listeners mentally to see, hear, smell, touch, or
taste what you are describing. More specific instructions for constructing word
pictures are given in Chapter 15.
Description may be used in a brief example, an extended illustration, a
hypothetical instance, or by itself. British Prime Minister David Cameron viv-
idly described World War II as:
A war which saw the streets of European cities strewn with rubble. The
skies of London lit by flames night after night.11
EXPLAINING HOW  In a speech about the dangers of lithium cell batteries,
student speaker Alexandria explained how batteries can injure children who in-
gest them:
When in contact with fluid-filled tissues such as a child’s esophagus or
stomach, the battery undergoes a chemical reaction [that] can cause any-
thing from severe burns and internal bleeding to larger issues. . . .12
Speakers who discuss or demonstrate processes of any kind rely at least in
part on explanations of how those processes work.
EXPLAINING WHY  Explaining why involves giving reasons for or conse-
quences of a policy, principle, or event. The president and founder of Study
Abroad Alumni International explained to a Study Abroad conference why
global awareness is important:
Why is global awareness so important? . . . Every six seconds a child dies
of hunger. I think we all need to be aware of this . . . and we need to do
something about it.13
USING DESCRIPTIONS AND EXPLANATIONS EFFECTIVELY  When large
sections of a speech contain long, nonspecific explanations, audience eyelids are
apt to fall shut. The following suggestions can help you to use descriptions and
explanations effectively in your speeches.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 167 07/11/14 2:08 PM
168 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.3
•	 Keep your descriptions and explanations brief. Too many details may make your
listeners say your speech was “everything I never wanted to know about the
subject.”
•	 Use language that is as specific and concrete as possible. Vivid and specific lan-
guage helps you to hold the audience’s attention and paint in your listeners’
minds the image you are trying to communicate. Chapter 12 provides more
tips for making your language specific.
•	 Avoid too much description and explanation. You can hold your audience’s
attention more effectively if you alternate explanations and descrip-
tions with other types of supporting material, such as brief examples or
statistics.
Definitions
Definitions, statements of what terms mean or how they are applied in specific
instances, have two justifiable uses in speeches. First, a speaker should be sure to
explain the meaning of any and all specialized, technical, or little-known terms
in his or her speech. Such definitions are usually achieved by classification, the
kind of definition you would find in a dictionary. Alternatively, a speaker may
define a term by showing how it works or how it is applied in a specific in-
stance—what is known as an operational definition.
DEFINITIONS BY CLASSIFICATION A definition by classification places a
term in the general class, group, or family to which it belongs and differentiates
it from all the other members of that class. Student speaker Patrick defined the
term hydraulic fracturing as “a drilling technique” (the general class to which it
belongs), “which harnesses incredible amounts of natural gas, but at the cost of
destroying our most precious resource: our drinking water” (differentiation of
hydraulic fracturing from other drilling techniques).14
OPERATIONAL DEFINITIONS  Sometimes a word or phrase may be familiar
to an audience, but as a speaker, you may be applying it in a specific way that
needs to be clarified. In such cases, you might provide an operational definition,
explaining how something works or what it does.
In her speech on vitamin D deficiency, student speaker Nicole operationally
defined rickets for her audience:
Rickets leads to weakened bones that produce deformities such as
bowed legs and curvature of the spine, making for consistent and some-
times lifelong pain.15
Both Nichole and Patrick in the preceding examples provided oral citations
of the sources in their definitions.
USING DEFINITIONS EFFECTIVELY  The following suggestions can help you
to use definitions more effectively in your speeches.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 168 07/11/14 2:08 PM
169
Types of Supporting Material 8.3
•	 Use a definition only when needed. Novice speakers too often use a definition
as an easy introduction or a time-filler. Resist the temptation to provide a
definition unless you are using a relatively obscure term or one with several
definitions.
•	 Be certain that your definition is understandable. Give your listeners definitions
that are immediately and easily understandable or you will have wasted
your time and perhaps even lost your audience.
•	 Be certain that your definition and your use of a term are consistent throughout
a speech. Even seemingly simple words can create confusion if they are not
defined and used consistently. For example, Roy opened his speech on the
potential hazards of abusing nonprescription painkillers by defining drugs
as nonprescription painkillers. A few minutes later, he confused his audi-
ence by using the word drug to refer to cocaine. Once he had defined the
term, he should have used it only in that context throughout the speech.
Analogies
An analogy is a comparison. Like a definition, it increases understanding; unlike
a definition, it deals with relationships and comparisons—between the new and
the old, the unknown and the known, or any other pairs of ideas or things. Anal-
ogies can help your listeners to understand unfamiliar ideas, things, and situa-
tions by showing how these matters are similar to something they already know.
There are two types of analogies. A literal analogy compares things that are
actually similar (two sports, two cities, two events). A figurative analogy may
take the form of a simile or a metaphor.
LITERAL ANALOGIES  Student speaker James compared insects with ocean
crustaceans when he advocated utilizing insects for food:
Crustaceans are literally the insects of the sea: They’re both arthropods.
But where crustaceans feed on trash, insects feed on nature’s salad bar.16
James’s comparison is a literal analogy—a comparison between two similar
things. If your listeners are from a culture or group other than your own or the
one from which the speech derives, literal analogies that draw on the listeners’
culture or group may help them to understand more readily the less familiar
places, things, and situations you are discussing. Literal analogies are often em-
ployed by people who want to influence public policy. For example, proponents
of trade restrictions argue that because Japan maintains its trade balance through
stringent import controls, so should the United States. The more similarities a
policymaker can show between the policies or situations being compared, the
better his or her chances of being persuasive.
FIGURATIVE ANALOGIES  In his speech accepting the 2012 Nobel Peace Prize
on behalf of the European Union, Nobel Committee Chair Throbjørn Jagland de-
scribed two paintings that hang in the town hall in Siena, Italy:
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 169 07/11/14 2:08 PM
170 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.3
[“Allegory of the effects of good government”] shows a living medieval
town, with the gates in the wall invitingly wide open to spirited peo-
ple bringing the harvest in from fruitful fields. But Lorenzetti painted
another picture, “Allegory of the effects of bad government.” It shows
Siena in chaos, closed and ravaged by the plague, destroyed by a strug-
gle for power and war.17
A literal analogy might have compared pre-World War I Europe to twenty-
first-century Europe. But Jagland went on to complete his figurative analogy
by comparing the paintings to the present-day choice between harmony and
conflict.
The two pictures are meant to remind us that it is up to ourselves
whether or not we are to live in well-ordered circumstances.
Because it relies not on facts or statistics, but rather on imaginative insights,
the figurative analogy is not considered hard evidence. But because it is creative,
it is inherently interesting and should help grab an audience’s attention. In a
speech titled “Short-Term Demands Vs. Long-Term Responsibilities,” PepsiCo
CEO Indra Nooyi used this figurative analogy:
Like the characters in the Hindu epic, the Ramayana, capitalism has
the ability to assume different forms for different times and different
nations.18
USING ANALOGIES EFFECTIVELY  Two suggestions can help you to use lit-
eral and figurative analogies more effectively:
•	 Be sure that the two things you compare in a literal analogy are very similar. The
more alike the two things being compared, the more likely it is that the anal-
ogy will stand up under attack.
•	 Be sure that the essential similarity between the two objects of a figurative analogy
is readily apparent. When you use a figurative analogy, it is crucial to make
clear the similarity on which the analogy is based. If you do not, your audi-
ence will end up wondering what in the world you are talking about.
Statistics
Many of us live in awe of numbers, or statistics. Perhaps nowhere is our respect
for statistics so evident—and so exploited—as in advertising. If three out of four
doctors surveyed recommend Pain Away aspirin, it must be the best. If Sudsy
Soap is 99.9 percent pure (whatever that means), surely it will help our com-
plexions. And if nine out of ten people like Sloppy Catsup in the taste test, we
will certainly buy some for this weekend’s barbecue. How can the statistics be
wrong?
The truth about statistics falls somewhere between such unconditional faith
in numbers and the wry observation that “There are three kinds of lies: lies,
damned lies, and statistics.”
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 170 07/11/14 2:08 PM
171
Types of Supporting Material 8.3
USING STATISTICS AS SUPPORT  Statistics can be expressed as either counts
or percentages. Verizon CEO Ivan Seidenberg used a count and a percentage in
the same sentence in his speech to a communications conference:
Using smart grids and mobile technologies to manage electric power
could create 280,000 new jobs and cut carbon emissions by more than
20 percent by 2020.19
USING STATISTICS EFFECTIVELY  The following guidelines can help you to
analyze and use statistics effectively and correctly:
•	 Use reliable sources. It has been said that figures don’t lie, but liars figure!
Indeed, statistics can be produced to support almost any conclusion desired.
Your goal is to cite authoritative and unbiased sources.
•	 Use authoritative sources. No source is an authority on everything; therefore,
no source can be credible on all subjects. The most authoritative source is
the primary source—the original collector and interpreter of the data. If you
find an interesting statistic in a newspaper or magazine article, look closely
to see whether a source is cited. If it is, try to find that source and the origi-
nal report of the statistic. Do not just assume that the secondhand account,
or secondary source, has reported the statistic accurately and fairly. As often
as possible, go to the primary source.
•	 Use unbiased sources. As well as being reputable and authoritative, sources
should be as unbiased as possible. We usually extend to government research
and various independent sources of statistics the courtesy of thinking them
unbiased. Because they are, for the most part, supposed to be unaffiliated
with any special interest, their statistics are presumed to be less biased than
those coming from such organizations as the American Tobacco Institute, the
AFL-CIO, or Microsoft. All three organizations have some special interest at
stake, and the data they gather are more likely to reflect their biases.
As you evaluate your sources, try to find out how the statistics were
gathered. For example, if a statistic relies on a sample, how was the sample
taken? A Thursday afternoon telephone poll of 20 registered voters in Brooklyn
is not an adequate sample of New York City voters. The sample is too small
and too geographically limited. In addition, it excludes anyone without a
telephone or anyone who is unlikely to be at home when the survey was
conducted. Sample sizes and survey methods do vary widely, but most
legitimate polls involve samples of 500 to 2,000 people, selected at random
from a larger population. Of course, finding out about the statistical meth-
odology may be more difficult than discovering the source of the statistic,
but if you can find it, the information will help you to analyze the value of
the statistic.
•	 Interpret statistics accurately. People are often swayed by statistics that sound
good but have, in fact, been wrongly calculated or misinterpreted. For ex-
ample, a speaker might say that the number of children killed by guns in
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 171 07/11/14 2:08 PM
172 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.3
the United States has doubled every year since 1950. Joel Best, author of
Damned Lies and Statistics: Untangling Numbers from the Media, Politicians, and
Activists, points out that actually doing the math quickly demonstrates how
wildly inaccurate this statistic is. If one child was killed in 1950, two in 1951,
four in 1952, and so on, the annual number by now would far exceed the
entire population of not just the United States but also of the entire Earth.20
Both as a user of statistics in your own speeches and as a consumer of
statistics in articles, books, and speeches, be constantly alert to what the sta-
tistics actually mean.
•	 Make your statistics understandable and memorable. You can make your statis-
tics easier to understand and more memorable by dramatizing, compacting,
exploding, or comparing them, as described in Table 8.2.
•	 Round off numbers. It is much easier to grasp and remember “2 million” than
2,223,147. Percentages, too, are more easily remembered if they are rounded
off. Most people seem to remember percentages even better if they are ex-
pressed as fractions.
•	 Use visual aids to present your statistics. Most audience members have diffi-
culty remembering a barrage of numbers thrown at them during a speech.
But if the numbers are displayed in a table or graph in front of your lis-
teners, they can more easily grasp the statistics. Figure 8.3 illustrates how a
speaker could lay out a table of statistics on how private health care in the
United States is distributed among various age groups. Using such a table,
you would still need to explain what the numbers mean, but you wouldn’t
have to recite them. We discuss visual aids in Chapter 14.
Table 8.2  Ways to Help Your Audience Understand and Remember Statistics
Strategy How to Do It Example
Dramatizing Get listeners’ attention by strategically
choosing the perspective from which you
present the statistic.
Listeners might pay greater attention if you say that genetics
exposes 90 percent of people to the risk of a disease than if you
report that 10 percent of people have a genetic variation that
protects them from the disease.21
Compacting Express the statistic in units or limits that are
meaningful or easily understandable to your
audience.
A fairly common way to compact a statistic is to express a
staggering amount of money in terms of cents: “We have
accumulated over 3.2 trillion dollars in unsecured consumer debt.
With an estimated 237 million adult citizens, that averages out to
$13,500 for every American adult.”22
Exploding Add or multiplying related numbers—for
example, cost per unit times number of units.
Because it is larger, the exploded statistic
seems more significant than the original
figures from which it was derived.
“. . . lowering the growth rate of health care costs by
1.5 percentage points per year will increase the real income of
middle-class families by $1,500 in 2020; $10,000 in 2030; and
$24,300 by 2040. That’s real relief for real people.”23
Comparing Compare your statistic with another that
heightens its impact.
“The [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] recommends
fluoridating water between 0.7 parts per million (PPM) and 1.7
PPM . . . To put PPM into perspective, 1 PPM is like 1 cent in
$10,000.”24
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 172 07/11/14 2:08 PM
173
Types of Supporting Material 8.3
Opinions
Opinions are testimony or quotations that express someone’s attitudes, be-
liefs, or values. Three types may be used as supporting material in speeches:
the testimonies of an expert authority, the testimonies of an ordinary (lay) per-
son with firsthand or eyewitness experience, and a quotation from a literary
work.
Age
Percentage
Uninsured
15–18 years
19–25 years
26–44 years
45–64 years
65 years and over
11%
31%
21%
13%
11%
Percentage of Employed People without
Health Insurance Coverage in
the United States, by Age
Percentage of Employed People without
Health Insurance Coverage in
the United States, by Age
Figure 8.3 Example of a Table of Statistics
Source: Data from U.S. Census Bureau, “Health Insurance Coverage Type by Age, Sex, and Labor Force
Status: 2010.” www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p70-134.pdf
Quick Check
Select Effective Statistics
•	 Are your sources reputable, authoritative, and unbiased?
•	 Did you interpret the statistics accurately?
•	 Are your statistics easy to understand?
•	 Are your statistics memorable?
•	 Did you round off the numbers?
•	 Can you present the statistics with visual aids?
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 173 07/11/14 2:08 PM
174 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.3
EXPERT TESTIMONY  Having already offered statistics on the number of
­
cigars Americans consume annually, Dena emphasized the danger to both
smoker and secondhand recipient by providing expert testimony (an opinion
offered by someone who is an authority on the subject under discussion) from a
National Cancer Institute advisor:
James Repace, an adviser to the National Cancer Institute, states, “If you
have to breathe secondhand smoke, cigar smoke is a lot worse than ciga-
rette smoke.”25
The testimony of a recognized authority can add a great deal of weight to
your arguments. Or if your topic requires that you make predictions—state-
ments that can be supported only in a marginal way by statistics or examples—
the statements of expert authorities may prove to be your most convincing
support.
LAY TESTIMONY  You are watching the nightly news. Newscasters reporting
on a large wildfire provide thorough statistics and descriptions to help ­
viewers
understand the fire, as well as a video clip of a veteran firefighter predicting
the likelihood that the fire will be brought under control soon. But the most
­
poignant moment of this news story is an interview with a woman who has just
been allowed to return to her home and has found it in smoldering ashes. She is
a layperson—not a firefighter or an expert on forest fires but someone who has
experienced the tragedy firsthand.
Like illustrations, lay testimony (an opinion or description offered by a
nonexpert who has firsthand experience) can stir an audience’s emotions. And
although it is neither as authoritative nor as unbiased as expert testimony, lay
testimony is often more memorable.
LITERARY QUOTATION  Another way to make a point memorable is to
include a literary quotation in your speech, an opinion or description by a
writer, expressed in a memorable and often poetic way. Speaking on changes
essential to the survival of the automotive industry, Chrysler Corpora-
tion CEO Sergio Marchionne drew on the words of philosopher Friedrich
Nietzsche:
The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche once said that “what really arouses
indignation against suffering is not suffering as such but the sense-
lessness of suffering. . . .” And a crisis that does not result in enduring
changes, in fundamental changes, will have been very senseless indeed.26
Note that the Nietzsche quotation is short. Brief, pointed quotations usually
have greater audience impact than longer, more rambling ones. As Shakespeare
said, “Brevity is the soul of wit” (Hamlet, II: 2).
Literary quotations have the additional advantage of being easily accessible.
You’ll find any number of quotation dictionaries on the Web and in the reference
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 174 07/11/14 2:08 PM
175
Types of Supporting Material 8.3
sections of most libraries. Arranged alphabetically by subject, these compila-
tions are easy to use.
USING OPINIONS EFFECTIVELY  Here are a few suggestions for using opin-
ions effectively in your speeches:
•	 Be certain that any authority you cite is an expert on the subject you are discussing.
Advertisers ignore this advice when they use well-known athletes to en-
dorse such items as flashlight batteries, breakfast cereals, and cars. Athletes
may indeed be experts on athletic shoes, tennis rackets, or stopwatches, but
they lack any specific qualifications to talk about many of the products they
endorse.
•	 Identify your sources. If a student quotes the director of the Harry Ransom
Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas but identifies that
person only as Tom Staley, few listeners will recognize the name, let alone
acknowledge his authority.
In Chapter 4, we discussed the importance of citing your sources orally.
In the course of doing so, you can provide additional information about the
qualifications of those sources, as the student speaker does in the following
example:
. . . as Professor Helen Norton of the University of Colorado explained in
a February 16, 2011, press release from the Equal Employment Opportu-
nity Commission, the rationale for jobless discrimination is that employ-
ers believe that those who’ve been out of work are not good employees
and that their job skills are not up to par.27
•	 Cite unbiased authorities. Just as the most reliable sources of statistics are un-
biased, so too are the most reliable sources of opinion. The chairman of Gen-
eral Motors may offer an expert opinion that the Chevrolet Cruze is the best
compact car on the market today. His expertise is unquestionable, but his
bias is obvious and makes him a less than trustworthy source of opinion on
the subject. A better source would be Consumer Reports analyses of the reli-
ability and repair records of compact cars.
•	 Cite opinions that are representative of prevailing opinion. Unless most of the
experts in the field share an opinion, its value is limited. Citing a minority
opinion leaves your conclusions open to easy rebuttal.
•	 Quote your sources accurately. If you quote or paraphrase either an expert or
a layperson, be certain that your quote or paraphrase is accurate and pre-
sented in the context in which the remarks were originally made.
•	 Use literary quotations sparingly. Be sure that you have a valid reason for
citing a literary quotation, and then use only one or two at most in a
speech.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 175 07/11/14 2:08 PM
176 Gathering and Using Supporting Material
8.4
The Best Supporting Material
8.4	 List and explain six criteria for determining the best supporting
material to use in a speech.
In this chapter, we have discussed six criteria for evaluating Web sites: account-
ability, accuracy, objectivity, currency, usability, and diversity. We have also pre-
sented guidelines for using each of six types of supporting material effectively.
However, even after you have applied these criteria and guidelines and have
eliminated some material, you might still have more supporting material than
you can possibly use for a short speech. How do you decide what to use and
what to eliminate? Use the following criteria to help you to make that final cut.
•	 Magnitude.  Bigger is better. The larger the numbers, the more convincing
your statistics. The more experts who support your point of view, the more
your expert testimony will command your audience’s attention.
•	 Proximity.  The best supporting material is whatever is the most relevant to
your listeners, or the closest to home. If you can demonstrate how an inci-
dent could affect audience members themselves, that illustration will have
far greater impact than a more remote one.
•	 Concreteness.  If you need to discuss principles and theories, explain them
with concrete examples and specific statistics.
•	 Variety.  A mix of illustrations, opinions, definitions, and statistics, for
­
example, is much more interesting and convincing than is the exclusive use
of any one type of supporting material.
•	 Humor.  Audiences usually appreciate a touch of humor in an example or
opinion. Only if your audience is unlikely to understand the humor or if
your speech is on a very somber and serious topic is humor not appropriate.
8.4
Quick Check
Types of Supporting Material
Illustrations	Relevant stories
Descriptions	 Word pictures
Explanations	Statements that make clear how something is done or why it
exists in its present form or existed in a past form
Definitions	 Concise explanations of a word or concept
Analogies	 Comparisons between two things
Statistics	Numbers that summarize data or examples
Opinions	Testimony or quotations from someone else
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 176 07/11/14 2:08 PM
177
The Best Supporting Material 8.4
•	 Suitability.  Your final decision about whether to use a certain piece of
­
supporting material will depend on its suitability to you, your speech,
the ­
occasion, and—as we continue to stress throughout the book—your
­
audience. For example, you would probably use more statistics in a
speech to a group of scientists than in an after-luncheon talk to the local
Rotary Club.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 177 07/11/14 2:08 PM
178 CHAPTER 8 STUDY GUIDE
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
8.1	 List five potential sources of supporting material for a speech.
Five sources of supporting material are personal knowledge and experience; the
Internet; online databases, which can be accessed by library subscription via a
networked computer; traditional library holdings, including books and refer-
ence resources; and interviews. Carefully evaluate Internet resources you find
through Web searches.
Key Terms
World Wide Web
Vertical search engine
Boolean search
Domain
Online databases
Stacks
8.2	 Explain five strategies for a methodical research process.
A methodological research process includes the following strategies: Develop
a preliminary bibliography, locate resources, assess the usefulness of resources,
take notes, and identify possible presentation aids.
Key Term
Preliminary bibliography
8.3	 List and describe six types of supporting material.
You can choose from various types of supporting material, including illustra-
tions, descriptions and explanations, definitions, analogies, statistics, and opin-
ions. A mix of supporting material is more interesting and convincing than the
exclusive use of any one type.
Key Terms
Illustration
Brief illustration
Extended illustration
Hypothetical illustration
Description
Explanation
Definition
Definition by
 classification
Operational definition
Analogy
Literal analogy
Figurative analogy
Statistics
Primary source
Secondary source
Opinions
Expert testimony
Lay testimony
Literary quotation
8.4	 List and explain six criteria for determining the best supporting
material to use in a speech.
Six criteria—magnitude, proximity, concreteness, variety, humor, and suitability—
can help you choose the most effective support for your speech.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 178 07/11/14 2:08 PM
179
CHAPTER 8 STUDY GUIDE
Think about These Questions
•	 Explain how you might use each of the five key sources of supporting
material to help you develop an informative speech on how to buy a new
computer.
•	 Electronic and print indexes and databases sometimes include abstracts of
books and articles rather than full texts. If you have read only the abstract
of a source, is it ethical to include that source on your speech bibliography?
•	 You neglected to record the bibliographic information for one of your infor-
mation sources: a magazine article found in the library. You discover this
the night before you must deliver your speech, and you have no time to
return to the library. How can you solve your problem in an ethical way?
•	 Reread the guidelines for each type of supporting material. Which of these
guidelines for the effective use of supporting material might also be con-
sidered a guideline for the ethical use of supporting material? Explain your
choices.
M08_BEEB3981_05_SE_C08_153-180.indd 179 07/11/14 2:08 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
Part 4
Crafting a Speech
Chapter 9	 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
Chapter 10	 Introducing Your Speech
Chapter 11	 Concluding Your Speech
Chapter 12	 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Crafting
a
Speech
Chapters
9-12
4
M09A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB4.indd 65 11/18/14 8:49 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Chapter 9  Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
1.	 Define primacy, recency, and complexity in your own words, and give a new example of a
central idea for a speech that would use each order.
2.	 The principles of primacy and recency are referred to several times in this chapter. If a
statistic offers overwhelming evidence of the severity of a given problem, is it ethical
for a speaker to save that statistic for last, or should the speaker reveal immediately to
the audience how severe the problem is? In other words, is there an ethical distinction
between primacy and recency?
Chapter 10  Introducing Your Speech
1.	 Describe, in just a few of your own words, each of the ten methods of introduction
described in this chapter.
2.	 What is the best speech introduction you have ever heard? Using the principles
discussed in this chapter, analyze why the introduction was so good.
Chapter 11  Concluding Your Speech
1.	 What are two major tasks of summarizing your speech in a conclusion and how can you
accomplish those tasks? What are two goals of providing closure in the conclusion and
how can you achieve those goals?
2.	 What is the best speech conclusion you have ever heard? How did it achieve the
purposes of a conclusion that are discussed in this chapter?
Chapter 12  Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
1.	 List and explain four ways to use words effectively.
2.	 List, in your own words, three ways to adapt your language style to a diverse audience.
3.	 A high school principal asked a student graduation speaker to avoid using the word
rape in her graduation speech. The student, who had been raped as a 14-year-old
sophomore, argued that she wanted to use the concrete word to help emphasize to her
classmates that they could overcome even the most devastating experiences in life. The
principal countered that he was suggesting ways to make the language of the speech
more appropriate to the occasion and the audience.34 What is your opinion on this issue?
What would you advise the speaker to do?
Crafting
a
Speech
Chapters
9-12
4
M09A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB4.indd 66 11/18/14 8:49 PM
181
Chapter 9
Organizing and
Outlining Your
Speech
“Organized
thought is the
basis of organized
action.”
—Alfred North
Whitehead
	9.1	Organizing Your Main Ideas
Organizing Ideas Topically
Organizing Ideas Chronologically
Organizing Ideas Spatially
Organizing Ideas to Show Cause
and Effect
Organizing Ideas by Problem-
Solution
Acknowledging Cultural
Differences in Organization
	9.2	Integrating Your Supporting Material
Outline
(continued)
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 181 11/11/14 4:57 PM
182 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
﻿9
Learning Objectives
	9.1	List and describe five patterns for organizing the main ideas of a speech.
	9.2	Explain how to integrate supporting material into a speech.
	9.3	Use verbal and nonverbal signposts to organize a speech for the ears
of others.
	9.4	Develop a preparation outline and speaking notes for a speech.
Maria went into the lecture hall feeling exhilarated. After all, Dr. Anderson was a
Nobel laureate in literature. He would be teaching and lecturing on campus for
at least a year. What an opportunity!
Dr. Anderson was greeted by thunderous applause when he walked onto
the stage. Maria was aware of an almost electric sense of expectation among the
audience members. Pen poised, she awaited his first words.
Five minutes later, Maria still had her pen poised. Dr. Anderson had gotten
off to a slow start. Ten minutes later, she laid her pen down and decided to con-
centrate just on listening. Twenty minutes later, she still had no idea what point
Dr. Anderson was trying to make. By the time the lecture was over, Maria was
practically asleep. Disappointed, she promised herself that she would skip the
remaining lectures in the series.
Dr. Anderson was not a dynamic speaker. But his motivated audience of
young would-be authors and admirers might have forgiven that shortcoming.
What they were unable to do was to unravel his hour’s worth of seemingly
pointless rambling—to get some sense of direction or some pattern of ideas from
his talk. Dr. Anderson had simply failed to organize his thoughts.
The scenario described above actually happened. Dr. Anderson (not his real
name) disappointed many people who had looked forward to his lectures. His
inability to organize his ideas made him an ineffectual speaker. No matter how
knowledgeable speakers may be, they must organize their ideas in logical pat-
terns to ensure that their audience can follow, understand, and remember what
is said. Our model of audience-centered communication, shown in Figure 9.1,
emphasizes that speeches are organized for audiences, with decisions about or-
ganization based in large part on an analysis of the audience.
	9.3	Organizing Your Presentation for the
Ears of Others: Signposting
Previews
Transitions
Summaries
Presentation Aids
	9.4	Outlining Your Speech
Developing Your Preparation
Outline
Sample Preparation Outline
Developing Your Speaking Notes
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 182 11/11/14 4:57 PM
183
Organizing Your Main Ideas 9.1
In this chapter, we will discuss the patterns of organization that are com-
monly used to arrange the main ideas of a speech. Then we will explain how
to integrate supporting materials into a speech. We will talk about transitions,
previews, and summaries. Finally, we will discuss and illustrate two types of
speech outline: the preparation outline and speaking notes. Chapter 10 and 11
discuss introductions and conclusions, the final components of the organiza-
tional stage of the preparation process.
Organizing Your Main Ideas
9.1	 List and describe five patterns for organizing the main ideas of a speech.
In Chapter 7, we discussed how to generate a preliminary plan for your speech
by determining whether your central idea has logical divisions, could be sup-
ported by several reasons, or could be explained by identifying specific steps.
These divisions, reasons, or steps become the main ideas of the body of your
speech and the basis for the organization task highlighted in Figure 9.1.
9.1
Generate
Main Ideas
Select and
Narrow
Topic
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Deliver
Speech
Figure 9.1  Organize your speech to help your audience
remember your key ideas and to give your speech clarity and
structure.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 183 11/11/14 4:57 PM
184 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.1
Now you are ready to decide which of your main ideas to discuss first, which
one second, and so on. You can choose from among five organizational patterns:
(1) topical, (2) chronological, (3) spatial, (4) causal, and (5) problem–solution. Or
you can combine several of these patterns. One additional variation of the problem–
solution pattern is the motivated sequence. Because it is used almost exclusively
in persuasive speeches, the motivated sequence is discussed in Chapter 17.
Organizing Ideas Topically
If your central idea has natural divisions, you can often organize your speech
topically. Speeches on such diverse topics as factors to consider when selecting
a mountain bike, types of infertility treatments, and the various classes of ham-
radio licenses all could reflect topical organization.
Natural divisions are often essentially equal in importance. It might not mat-
ter which point you discuss first, second, or third. You can simply arrange your
main ideas as a matter of personal preference. At other times, you may organize
your main points based on one of three principles: primacy, recency, or complexity.
Primacy  The principle of primacy suggests that you discuss your most im-
portant or convincing point first in your speech. The beginning of your speech
can be the most important position if your listeners are either unfamiliar with
your topic or hostile toward your central idea.
When your listeners are uninformed, your first point must introduce them
to the topic and define unfamiliar terms that are integral to the discussion. What
you say early in your speech will affect your listeners’ understanding of the rest
of your speech. If your listeners are likely to be hostile toward your central idea,
putting your most important or convincing point first will lessen the possibility
that you might lose or alienate them before you reach the end of your speech. In
addition, your strongest idea may so influence listeners’ attitudes that they will
be more receptive to your central idea.
Recognizing the controversial nature of stem-cell research, the speaker in
the following example arranges the three main points of the speech according to
primacy, advancing the most persuasive argument first:
Purpose Statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to explain the applications of stem-cell research.
Central Idea:	
Stem-cell research has three important applications.
Main Ideas:	 I. 
At the most fundamental level, understanding
stem cells can help us to understand better the
process of human development.
	 II. 
Stem-cell research could streamline the way
we develop and test drugs.
	 III. 
Stem-cell research can generate cells and tissue
that could be used for “cell therapies.”1
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 184 11/11/14 4:57 PM
185
Organizing Your Main Ideas 9.1
Recency  According to the principle of recency, the point that was dis-
cussed last is the one audiences will remember best. If your audience is at least
somewhat knowledgeable about and generally favorable toward your topic
and central idea, you should probably organize your main points according to
recency.
For example, if your speech is on various living arrangements that are avail-
able to college students, you might decide to discuss living at home, rooming in
a dorm, joining a fraternity or sorority, and renting an apartment. If you wanted
your audience of fellow students to consider living at home because of the sav-
ings involved, you would probably discuss that possibility as the fourth and last
option. Your speech might have the following structure:
Purpose Statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to discuss the pros and cons of four living arrange-
ments for college students.
Central Idea:	
College students have at least four living arrange-
ments available to them.
Main Ideas:	 I. Living in a dormitory
	 II. Renting an apartment
	 III. Joining a fraternity or sorority
	 IV. Living at home
Complexity  If your main ideas range from simple to complicated, it makes
sense to arrange them in order of complexity, progressing from the simple to
the more complex. If, for example, you were to explain to your audience how
to compile a family health profile and history, you might begin by discussing
the most easily accessible source of health information and proceed to the more
involved:
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to compile a family health profile and history.
Central idea:	
Compiling a family health profile and history can
be accomplished with the help of three sources.
Main ideas:	 I. Elderly relatives
	 II. Old hospital records and death certificates
	 III. National health registries2
Teachers, from those in the very early elementary grades on up, use order
of complexity to organize their courses and lessons. The kindergartner is taught
to trace circles before learning to print a lowercase a. The young piano student
practices scales and arpeggios before playing Beethoven sonatas. The college
student practices writing 500-word essays before attempting a major research
paper. You have learned most of your skills in order of complexity.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 185 11/11/14 4:57 PM
186 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.1
Ordering Ideas Chronologically
If you decide that your central idea could be explained best by a number of
steps, you will probably organize those steps chronologically. Chronological
organization is organization by time; that is, your steps are ordered according to
when each occurred or should occur. Historical speeches and how-to speeches
are the two kinds of speeches that are usually organized chronologically.
Examples of topics for historical speeches might include the history of the
women’s movement in the United States, the sequence of events that led to the
1974 resignation of President Richard Nixon, or the development of the mod-
ern Olympic Games. You can choose to organize your main points either from
earliest to most recent (forward in time) or from recent events back into history
(backward in time). The progression that you choose depends on your personal
preference and on whether you want to emphasize the beginning or the end of
the sequence.
Forward in Time  In the following outline for a speech on the development
of the Apple iPad, the speaker moves forward in time, making his last point the
one that remains most fresh in the minds of his audience at the end of his speech:
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to trace the major events in the development of the
iPad.
Central idea:	
Drawing on the technology and market success of
earlier devices, the Apple iPad quickly became a
bestseller.
Main ideas:	 I. 1993: Newton Message Pad marketed by Apple
	 II. 2001: iPod introduced
	 III. 2007: iPhone debuted
	 IV. 2010: iPad unveiled3
How-To Explanations  How-to explanations are also likely to follow a se-
quence or series of steps arranged from beginning to end, from the first step to
the last—forward in time. A speech explaining how to clean up a broken com-
pact fluorescent light bulb (CFL) might be organized as follows:
Quick Check
Primacy, Recency, and Complexity
•	 Primacy. Most important point first
•	 Recency. Most important point last
•	 Complexity. Simplest point first, most complex point last
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 186 11/11/14 4:57 PM
187
Organizing Your Main Ideas 9.1
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to list the steps required to clean up a broken CFL.
Central idea:	 Cleaning up a broken CFL requires four steps.
Main ideas:	 I. 
With the air conditioner turned off, allow the
room to air out for 15 minutes.
	 II. 
Collect all the light bulb fragments with dis-
posable gloves or a stiff piece of cardboard.
	 III. 
Wipe up any remaining debris with damp
paper towels or sticky tape.
	 IV. 
Dispose of fragments and clean-up materials
in a sealed container.4
Backward in Time  In another chronologically organized speech, this one
discussing the development of YouTube, the speaker wanted to emphasize the
inauspicious origins of the popular video site. Therefore, she organized the
speech backward in time:
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to describe YouTube’s rapid rise from humble
beginnings.
Central idea:	
The popular video site YouTube grew rapidly
from humble beginnings.
Main ideas:	 I. 
January 2012: YouTube exceeds 4 billion
viewers a day.
	 II. November 2006: YouTube acquired by Google
	 III. 
December 2005: YouTube site publicly
launched
	 IV. 
February 2005: YouTube founded in a garage
in Menlo Park, California5
Chronological organization, then, involves either forward or backward
progression, depending on which end of a set of events the speaker intends to
emphasize. The element that is common to both movements is that dates and
events are discussed in sequence rather than in random order.
Organizing Ideas Spatially
When you say “As you enter the room, the table is to your right, the easy chair
is to your left, and the kitchen door is straight ahead,” you are using spatial
­organization: arranging ideas—usually natural divisions of the central idea—
according to their location or direction. It does not matter whether you prog-
ress up or down, east or west, forward or back, as long as you follow a logical
progression. If you skip up, down, over, and back, you will only confuse your
listeners rather than painting a distinct word picture.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 187 11/11/14 4:57 PM
188 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.1
Speeches on such diverse subjects as the National Museum of the American
Indian, the travels of Robert Louis Stevenson, or the structure of an atom can all
be organized spatially. Here is a sample outline for the first of those topics:
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to list and describe the four habitats re-created
on the grounds of the National Museum of the
American Indian in Washington, D.C.
Central idea:	
The grounds of the National Museum of the
American Indian in Washington, D.C., are divided
into four traditional American Indian habitats.
Main ideas:	 I. Upland hardwood forest
	 II. Lowland freshwater wetlands
	 III. Eastern meadowlands
	 IV. Traditional croplands6
The organization of this outline is spatial, progressing through the grounds of
the museum.
Organizing Ideas to Show Cause and Effect
If your central idea can be developed by discussing either steps or reasons, you
might consider a cause-and-effect organization of your main ideas. A speech or-
ganized to show cause and effect may first identify a situation and then discuss
the effects that result from it (cause → effect). Or the speech may present a situ-
ation and then seek its causes (effect → cause). As the recency principle would
suggest, the cause–effect pattern emphasizes the effects; the effect–cause pattern
emphasizes the causes.
Cause–Effect  In the following example, Vonda organizes her speech ac-
cording to cause–effect, discussing the cause (widespread adult illiteracy) as her
first main idea and its effects (poverty and social costs) as her second and third
main ideas:
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to identify two effects of adult illiteracy.
Central idea:	 Adult illiteracy affects everyone.
Main ideas:	 I. 
(Cause): Adult illiteracy is widespread in
America today.
	 II. (Effect): Adult illiterates often live in poverty.
	 III. (Effect): Adult illiteracy is costly to society.7
Effect–Cause  In contrast, Joseph organizes his speech on for-profit uni-
versities according to an effect-cause pattern, discussing the effect (for-profit
universities enrolling unqualified students) as his first main idea and its causes
(misleading recruiters and false advertising) as his second and third main ideas:
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 188 11/11/14 4:57 PM
189
Organizing Your Main Ideas 9.1
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to explain how for-profit universities are enrolling
unqualified students.
Central idea:	
For-profit universities are using two unethical
tactics to enroll unqualified students.
Main ideas:	 I. 
(Effect): For-profit universities are enrolling
unqualified students who have struggled in
more traditional college settings and who may
not even have a high-school diploma or GED.
	  II. (Cause): Recruiters lie about or misrepresent
their programs when recruiting students.
	 III. (Cause): False Web and television advertising
lures additional students.8
After presenting the cause or effect in the first main idea, you can use the
principles of primacy, recency, or complexity to decide the order in which you
will discuss your other main ideas.
Organizing Ideas by Problem–Solution
If you want to discuss why a problem exists or what its effects are, you will
probably organize your speech according to cause and effect, as discussed in
the previous section. However, if you want to emphasize how best to solve the
problem, you will probably use a problem–solution organization. Because it is
often appropriate for persuasive speeches, problem–solution organization is dis-
cussed further in Chapter 17.
From Problem to Solution  Like causes and effects, problems and solu-
tions can be discussed in either order. If you are speaking to an audience already
fairly aware of a problem but uncertain how to solve it, you will probably dis-
cuss the problem first and then the solution(s). Speechwriter Cynthia Starks ex-
plains how Robert Kennedy utilized problem–solution organization to comfort
and inspire a crowd in Indianapolis on April 4, 1968, immediately following the
assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.:
With sensitivity and compassion, [Kennedy] told them of King’s
death (the devastating “problem”). He praised King’s dedication to
“love and to justice between fellow human beings,” adding that, “he
died in the cause of that effort.”
Then he offered a solution—to put aside violence and to embrace
love and understanding toward each other.
Starks concludes by offering evidence of the effectiveness of Kennedy’s
problem–solution speech:
Many American cities burned after King’s death, but there was no
fire in Indianapolis, which heard the words of Robert Kennedy.9
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 189 11/11/14 4:57 PM
190 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.1
From Solution to Problem  If your audience knows about an action
or program that has been implemented but does not know the reasons for
its implementation, you might select instead a solution–problem pattern of
organization. In the following example, the speaker knows that her listen-
ers are already aware of a new business–school partnership program in their
community but believes that they might be unclear about why it has been
established:
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able
to explain how business–school partnership pro-
grams can help to solve two of the major problems
facing our public schools today.
Central idea:	
Business–school partnership programs can help
to alleviate at least two of the problems faced by
public schools today.
Main ideas:	 I. 
(Solution): In a business–school partnership,
local businesses provide volunteers, financial
support, and in-kind contributions to public
schools.
	  II. (Problem): Many public schools can no
longer afford special programs and fine arts
programs.
	 III. (Problem): Many public schools have no
resources to fund enrichment materials and
opportunities.
Note that in both of the preceding examples the main ideas are natural divi-
sions of the central idea.
Quick Check
Organizing Your Main Points
Topical	 Organization according to primacy, recency, or complexity
Chronological	 Organization by time or sequence
Spatial	 Organization based on location or direction
Cause and effect	
Organization that focuses on a situation and its causes or a
situation and its effects
Problem–solution	
Organization that focuses on a problem and then solutions to
it or on a solution and then the problems it would solve
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 190 11/11/14 4:57 PM
191
Integrating Your Supporting Material 9.2
Acknowledging Cultural Differences
in Organization
Although the five patterns just discussed are typical of the way in which speakers
in the United States are expected to organize and process information, they are
not necessarily typical of all cultures.10 In fact, each culture teaches its members
patterns of thought and organization that are considered appropriate for various
occasions and audiences. On the whole, U.S. speakers tend to be more linear and
direct than speakers from Semitic, Asian, Romance, or Russian cultures. Semitic
speakers support their main points by pursuing tangents that might seem off-
topic to many U.S. speakers. Asians may only allude to a main point through
a circuitous route of illustration and parable. And speakers from Romance and
Russian cultures tend to begin with a basic principle and then move to facts and
illustrations that they only gradually connect to a main point. The models in
­
Figure 9.2 illustrate these culturally diverse patterns of organization.
Of course, these are very broad generalizations. But as an audience member
who recognizes the existence of cultural differences, you can better appreciate
and understand the organization of a speaker from a culture other than your
own. He or she might not be disorganized, but instead, using organizational
strategies that are different from the ones presented earlier in this chapter.
Integrating Your Supporting Material
9.2	 Explain how to integrate supporting material into a speech.
Once you have organized your main ideas, you are ready to flesh out the speech
with your supporting material for each idea. You might realize that in support of
your second main idea, you have an illustration, two statistics, and an opinion.
In what order should you present these items?
9.2
U.S. Semitic Asian Romance Russian
Figure 9.2  Organizational patterns of speaking will vary by culture.
Source: Lieberman, Public Speaking in the Multicultural Environment, “Organizational patterns by culture”
©1997. Reproduced by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 191 11/11/14 4:57 PM
192 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.2
You can sometimes use the five standard organizational patterns to arrange
your supporting material. Illustrations, for instance, may be organized chrono-
logically. In the following example, the speaker uses a chronological sequence of
several brief illustrations of cutting-edge technology:
. . . . miracle has followed upon miracle—from a television in every home in
the 1950s, to the launching of the first communications satellite in the 1960s,
to the introduction of cable TV in the 1970s, the rise of personal computers
in the 1980s, the Internet in the 1990s, and social media in the 2000s.11
At other times, however, none of the five patterns may seem suited to the
supporting materials you have. In those instances, you might need to turn to
an organizational strategy that is more specifically adapted to your supporting
materials. These strategies include (1) primacy or recency, (2) specificity, (3) com-
plexity, and (4) “soft” to “hard” evidence.
Primacy or Recency  We have already discussed how the principles of pri-
macy and recency can determine whether you put a main idea at the beginning
or the end of your speech. These patterns are used so frequently to arrange sup-
porting materials that we mention them again here.
Suppose that you have several statistics to support a main point. All are rele-
vant and significant, but one is especially gripping. In a recent speech, American
Cancer Society CEO John Seffrin showed images of and described the following
brief examples of international tobacco advertising:
The effort to build brand loyalty begins early. Here is an example of that
in Africa—a young man wearing a hat with a cigarette brand logo. . . .
Look at this innocent baby wearing a giant Marlboro logo on his
shirt. . . .
Notice how this ad links smoking to American values that are
­
attractive to third-world kids—wealth, sophistication, and urbanity. It
also shows African Americans living the American Dream. If you’re a
poor kid in Africa, this image can be very powerful.
And finally, this one from Bucharest, Romania, which is my favorite.
When the Berlin Wall came down, no one rushed into Eastern Europe
faster than the tobacco industry. Here you can see the Camel logo etched
in the street lights. In my opinion, this is one of the most disturbing exam-
ples of the public sector partnering with private industry to the detriment
of its citizens.12
It is evident that Seffrin applied the principle of recency to his examples,
as he identifies the final one as “my favorite” and “one of the most disturbing.”
The principle of primacy or recency can also be applied to groups of statistics,
opinions, or any combination of supporting material.
Specificity  Sometimes your supporting material will range from very spe-
cific examples to more general overviews of a situation. You may either offer
your specific information first and end with your general statement or make the
general statement first and support it with specific evidence.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 192 11/11/14 4:57 PM
193
Integrating Your Supporting Material 9.2
Another application of specificity might be to compact or explode sta-
tistics, as discussed in Chapter 8. Compacting moves statistics from general
to specific. Exploding moves them in the other direction, from specific to
general. In her speech on alternatives to imprisonment, Anastasia uses both
tactics. She begins with a broad statistic and makes it more specific by com-
pacting it. Then she moves back toward a general statement by exploding a
related statistic:
. . . there are more than 2.4 million U.S. residents who serve time in
prison. That means that one in every 142 residents is in prison right now,
or approximately 2.3 percent of the total population. While this num-
ber may seem reasonable, when you think about how many people
went through prison at some point of their lives, that number rises to
25 percent of the total population.13
Complexity  We have discussed organizing main ideas by moving from
the simple to the complex. The same method of organization may also deter-
mine how you order your supporting material. In many situations, it makes
sense to start with the simplest ideas that are easy to understand and work
up to more complex ones. In her speech on solar radiation, Nichole’s sup-
porting materials include explanations of two effects of solar storms. She
presents the simpler explanation first—of electrical blackouts and disrup-
tions in radio broadcasts—and then goes on to the more complex explanation
of cosmic radiation:
The sun produces storms on its surface in eleven-year cycles. During
solar maximum, these storms will make their presence known to the
land-bound public through electrical blackouts and disruptions in radio
broadcasts. These storms cause the sun to throw off electrically charged
ions that, combined with charged particles, enter the Earth’s atmosphere
from outer space. This is known collectively as cosmic radiation.14
Soft Evidence to Hard Evidence  Supporting material can also be ar-
ranged from “soft” to “hard.” Soft evidence rests on opinion or inference. Hy-
pothetical illustrations, descriptions, explanations, definitions, analogies, and
opinions are usually considered soft. Hard evidence includes factual examples
and statistics.
Soft-to-hard organization of supporting material relies chiefly on the prin-
ciple of recency—that the last statement is remembered best. Notice how Beth
moves from an illustration to expert testimony (both soft evidence) to a statistic
(hard evidence) in her speech on the danger of sand holes:
Illustration (soft evidence)	
An article in the Christian Science Monitor
Web site of August 24, 2012, describes how a
South Korean exchange student suffocated in
a Southern California beach sand pit that he
had dug with fellow students and staff from
the small California college he attended.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 193 11/11/14 4:57 PM
194 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.3
Expert testimony	 Father and son physicians Dr. Bradley Maron and
(soft evidence) 	
Dr. Barry Maron explain that the unstable walls of
a sand hole can unexpectedly collapse, leaving no
evidence of a victim’s location.
Statistic	 During the decade between 1997 and 2007, 52
(hard evidence) 	
documented accidents occurred in dry-sand holes
dug for recreational purposes.15
The speaker has arranged her supporting material from soft to hard.
Quick Check
Integrating Your Supporting Material
Strategy	Description
Primacy	 Most important material first
Recency	 Most important material last
Specificity	
From specific information to general overview or from
general overview to specific information
Complexity	 From simple to more complex material
Soft to hard evidence	
From opinion or hypothetical illustration, for example, to
fact or statistic
Organizing Your Presentation for the
Ears of Others: Signposting
9.3	 Use verbal and nonverbal signposts to organize a speech for the ears of
others.
You have a logically ordered, fairly complete plan for your speech. But if you de-
livered the speech at this point, your audience might become frustrated or con-
fused as they tried to discern your organizational plan. So your next task is to
develop signposts—organizational cues for your audience’s ears. Three types of
signposts can serve as glue to hold your speech together: transitions, previews,
and summaries.
Previews
In Chapter 12, we discuss the differences between writing and speaking styles.
One significant difference is that public speaking is more repetitive. Audience-
centered speakers need to remember that the members of their audience, unlike
9.3
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 194 11/11/14 4:57 PM
195
Organizing Your Presentation for the Ears of Others: Signposting 9.3
readers, cannot go back to review a missed point. A preview is a statement of
what is to come. It “tells them what you’re going to tell them,” building anticipa-
tion of an important idea.
Initial Previews An initial preview is a statement of what the main ideas
of the speech will be. As discussed in Chapter 7, it is usually presented in con-
junction with the central idea at or near the end of the introduction as a blueprint
for the speech.
Speaking on problems with the U.S. patent system, Robert offered the fol-
lowing blueprint at the end of his introduction:
While patents are a good idea in principle, in practice they have turned
into a disaster. First, I’ll take you on a tour of our broken patent system.
Then I’ll walk you through the havoc it wreaks on us, our economy, and
our future. Finally, we’ll explore hope in potential solutions. . . .16
In this blueprint, Robert clearly previews his main ideas and introduces
them in the order in which he will discuss them in the body of the speech.
Internal Previews  In addition to using previews near the beginning,
speakers also use them at various points throughout their speeches. An internal
preview introduces and outlines ideas that will be developed as the speech pro-
gresses. Note how the following quotation from a speech on hotel security pro-
vides an internal preview:
. . . the question remains, what can we do, as potential travelers and po-
tential victims, to protect ourselves?17
Just as anticipating an idea helps audience members to remember it, so men-
tally answering a question helps them to plant the answer firmly in their minds.
Transitions
A transition is a verbal or nonverbal signal that a speaker has finished discuss-
ing one idea and is moving to another.
Verbal Transitions  A speaker can sometimes make a verbal transition
simply by repeating a key word from an earlier statement or by using a synonym
or a pronoun that refers to an earlier key word or idea. This type of transition
is often used to make one sentence flow smoothly into the next. (The previous
sentence itself is an example: “This type of transition” refers to the sentence that
precedes it.)
Other verbal transitions are words or phrases that show relationships be-
tween ideas. Note the italicized transitional phrases in the following examples:
•	 In addition to transitions, previews and summaries are also considered to be
signposts.
•	 Not only does plastic packaging use up our scarce resources; it contaminates
them as well.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 195 11/11/14 4:57 PM
196 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.3
•	 In other words, as women’s roles have changed, they have also contributed to
this effect.
•	 In summary, Fanny Brice was the best-known star of Ziegfeld’s Follies.
•	 Therefore, I recommend that you sign the grievance petition.
Simple enumeration ( first, second, third) can also point out relationships be-
tween ideas and provide transitions.
One type of signpost that can occasionally backfire and do more harm than
good is one that signals the end of a speech. Finally and in conclusion give the au-
dience implicit permission to stop listening, and they often do. If the speech has
been too long or has otherwise not gone well, the audience may even express
their relief audibly. Better strategies for moving into a conclusion include repeat-
ing a key word or phrase, using a synonym or pronoun that refers to a previous
idea, offering a final summary, or referring to the introduction of the speech. We
will discuss the final summary in more detail later in this chapter.
Internal previews and summaries, which we will discuss shortly, are yet
another way to provide verbal transitions from one point to the next in your
speech. They have the additional advantage of repeating your main ideas,
thereby enabling audience members to understand and remember them.
As summarized in Table 9.1, repetition of key words or ideas, the use of
transitional words or phrases, enumeration, and internal previews and summa-
ries all provide verbal transitions from one idea to the next. You might need to
experiment with several alternatives before you find the smooth transition you
seek in a given instance. If none of these alternatives seems to work well, con-
sider a nonverbal transition.
Nonverbal Transitions A nonverbal transition can occur in several
ways, sometimes alone and sometimes in combination with a verbal transition.
A change in facial expression, a pause, an altered vocal pitch or speaking rate, or
a movement all may indicate a transition.
For example, a speaker talking about the value of cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation began his speech with a powerful anecdote about a man who suffered a
heart attack at a party. No one knew how to help, and the man died. The speaker
then looked up from his notes and paused while maintaining eye contact with
Table 9.1  Verbal Transitions
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
Strategy Example
Repeating a key word or using a synonym
pronoun that refers to an earlier key word
“These problems cannot be allowed to continue.”
Using a transitional word or phrase “In addition to the facts that I’ve mentioned, we need to
consider one other problem.”
Enumerating “Second, there has been a rapid increase in the number
of accidents reported.”
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 196 11/11/14 4:57 PM
197
Organizing Your Presentation for the Ears of Others: Signposting 9.3
his audience. His next words were “The real tragedy of Bill Jorgen’s death was
that it should not have happened.” His pause, as well as the words that fol-
lowed, indicated a transition into the body of the speech. Like this speaker, most
good speakers use a combination of verbal and nonverbal transitions to move
from one point to another through their speeches.
Summaries
Like a preview, a summary, or recap of what has been said, provides additional
exposure to a speaker’s ideas and can help to ensure that audience members will
grasp and remember them. Most speakers use two types of summaries: the final
summary and the internal summary.
Final Summary A final summary restates the main ideas of a speech and
gives an audience their last exposure to those ideas. It occurs just before the end
of a speech, often doing double duty as a transition between the body and the
conclusion. Here is an example of a final summary from a speech on the U.S.
Customs Service:
Today, we have focused on the failing U.S. Customs Service. We have
asked several important questions, such as “Why is Customs having
such a hard time doing its job?” and “What can we do to remedy this
situation?” When the cause of a serious problem is unknown, the con-
tinuation of the dilemma is understandable. However, the cause for the
failure of the U.S. Customs Service is known: a lack of personnel. Given
that fact and our understanding that Customs is vital to America’s inter-
ests, it would be foolish not to rectify this situation.18
This final summary leaves no doubt as to the important points of the speech.
We discuss the use of final summaries in more detail in Chapter 11.
Internal Summaries  As the term suggests, an internal summary occurs
within the body of a speech; it restates the ideas that have been developed up to
that point. Susan uses this internal summary in her speech on the teacher shortage:
So let’s review for just a moment. One, we are endeavoring to imple-
ment educational reforms; but two, we are in the first years of a dramatic
increase in enrollment; and three, fewer quality students are opting for
education; while four, many good teachers want out of teaching; plus
five, large numbers will soon be retiring.19
Internal summaries are often used in combination with internal previews to
form transitions between major points and ideas. The following example makes
clear what has just been discussed in the speech as well as what will be dis-
cussed next:
So now [that] we are aware of the severity of the disease and unique rea-
sons for college students to be concerned, we will look at some steps we
need to take to combat bacterial meningitis.20
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 197 11/11/14 4:57 PM
198 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.4
Transitions, summaries, and previews are the glue that holds a speech ­
together.
Such signposts can help you to achieve a coherent flow of ideas and help your
audience to remember those ideas. Unfortunately, you cannot guarantee that
your audience will be attentive to your signposts. In Chapter 1, we discussed the
concept of noise as it affects the public-speaking process. It is possible for your
listeners to be so distracted by internal or external noise that they fail to hear or
process even your most carefully planned verbal signposts.
One way in which you can increase the likelihood of your listeners’ attend-
ing to your signposting is to prepare and use presentation aids to supplement
your signposts. For example, you could display on PowerPointTM or similar
slide a bulleted or numbered outline of your main ideas as you initially preview
them in your introduction and again as you summarize them in your conclu-
sion. Some speakers prefer to use one slide for each main point. Transitions be-
tween points are emphasized as the speaker displays the next slide.
In Chapter 14, we discuss guidelines for developing and using such presen-
tation aids. Especially if your speech is long or its organization is complex, you
can help your audience to remember your organization if you provide visual
support for your signposts.
Outlining Your Speech
9.4	 Develop a preparation outline and speaking notes for a speech.
Although few speeches are written in paragraph form, most speakers develop a
detailed preparation outline of the central idea, main ideas, and supporting ma-
terial. Depending on your instructor’s specific requirements, it may also include
your specific purpose, discussed in Chapter 7; your introduction and conclu-
sion, discussed in Chapter 10 and 11; and your references, discussed in Chapter
4. One CEO notes,
9.4
Quick Check
Types of Signposts
•	 Initial previews
•	 Internal previews
•	 Verbal transitions
•	 Nonverbal transitions
•	 Final summaries
•	 Internal summaries
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 198 11/11/14 4:57 PM
199
Outlining Your Speech 9.4
Unless you sit down and write out your thoughts and put them in a co-
gent order, you can’t deliver a cogent speech. Maybe some people have
mastered that art. But I have seen too many people give speeches they
really haven’t thought out.21
From your detailed preparation outline, you will eventually develop speaking
notes, a shorter outline that you will use when you deliver your speech. Let’s
look at the specific characteristics of both types of outlines.
Developing Your Preparation Outline
To begin your outlining task, you might try a technique known as mapping, or
clustering. Write on a sheet of paper all the main ideas, subpoints, and support-
ing material for the speech. Then use geometric shapes and arrows to indicate
the logical relationships among them, as shown in Figure 9.3.
Nationwide Insurance speechwriter Charles Parnell describes another tech-
nique for beginning an outline:
Endemic to
academia
Undermines
education
Scope of cyber-plagiarism
Spread of cyber-plagiarism
Solutions
Infiltrates
job market
Internet
paper mills
Lack of
enforcement
Student
culture
Institution Administration Faculty Students
Figure 9.3 A map shows the relationships among a speaker’s three main
ideas and their subpoints. Here, main ideas are enclosed by rectangles and
subpoints by ovals. Supporting material could be indicated by another shape
and connected to the appropriate subpoints.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 199 11/11/14 4:57 PM
200 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.4
I often start by jotting down a few ideas on the [computer] screen, then
move them around as necessary to build some sort of coherent pattern. I
then fill in the details as they occur to me.
What that means is that you can really start anywhere and eventu-
ally come up with an entire speech, just as you can start with any piece of
a puzzle and eventually put it together.22
Whatever technique you choose to begin your outline, your ultimate goal is
to produce a plan that lets you judge the unity and coherence of your speech—to
see how well the parts fit together and how smoothly the speech flows. The fol-
lowing suggestions will help you to complete your preparation outline. How-
ever, keep in mind that different instructors may have different expectations for
both outline content and outline format. Be sure to understand and follow your
own instructor’s guidelines.
Write Your Preparation Outline in Complete Sentences Like
Those You Will Use When Delivering Your Speech  Unless you
write complete sentences, you will have trouble judging the coherence of the
speech. Moreover, complete sentences will help during your early rehearsals. If
you write cryptic phrases, you might not remember what they mean.
Use Standard Outline Form  Although you did not have to use stand­
ard outline form when you began to outline your ideas, you need to do so
now. Standard outline form lets you see at a glance the exact relationships
among various main ideas, subpoints, and supporting material in your speech.
It is an important tool for evaluating your speech as well as a requirement in
many ­
public-speaking courses. An instructor who requires speech outlines will
­
generally expect standard outline form. To produce a correct outline, follow the
instructions given here and summarized in Figure 9.4.
Use Standard Outline Numbering  Logical and fairly easy to learn,
outline numbering follows this sequence:
 I.  First main idea
A.	 First subpoint of I
B.	 Second subpoint of I
1.	 First subpoint of B
2.	 Second subpoint of B
a.	 First subpoint of 2
b.	 Second subpoint of 2
II.  Second main idea
Although it is unlikely that you will subdivide beyond the level of lower-
case letters (a, b, etc.) in most speech outlines, next would come numbers in pa-
rentheses and then lowercase letters in parentheses.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 200 11/11/14 4:57 PM
201
Outlining Your Speech 9.4
Use at Least Two Subdivisions, If Any, for Each Point  Logic dic-
tates that you cannot divide anything into one part. For example, if you have
only one piece of supporting material, incorporate it into the subpoint or main
idea that it supports. If you have only one subpoint, incorporate it into the main
idea above it. Although there is no firm limit to the number of subpoints you may
have, if there are more than five, you might want to place some of them under
another point. An audience will remember your ideas more easily if they are
divided into blocks of no more than five.
Indent Main Ideas, Points, Subpoints, and Supporting Material
Properly  Main ideas, indicated by Roman numerals, are written closest to
the left margin. Notice that the periods following the Roman numerals line up,
so the first words of the main ideas also line up.
  I. First main idea
 II. Second main idea
III. Third main idea
Letters or numbers of subpoints and supporting material begin directly un-
derneath the first word of the point above.
Rule Example
1. Use standard outline numbers and letters. I.
A.
1.
a.
(1)
(a)
2. Use at least two subpoints, if any, I.
for each main idea. A.
B.
3. Properly indent main ideas, subpoints, I. First main idea
and supporting material. A. First subpoint of I
1. First subpoint of A
2. Second subpoint of A
B. Second subpoint of I
II. Second main idea
CORRECT OUTLINE FORM
Figure 9.4 Use this summary as a reminder of the rules of proper outlining when
you write your preparation outline.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 201 11/11/14 4:57 PM
202 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.4
I.	 First main idea
A.	First subpoint of I
If a main idea or subpoint takes up more than one line, the second line be-
gins under the first word of the preceding line:
I.	 Every speech has three parts.
A.	The first part, both in our discussion and in actual delivery, is the
introduction, which many speechwriters develop last.
The same rules of indentation apply at all levels of the outline. Note that
if you are using a word-processing program, you may find it easier to format
your outline with the AutoFormat feature turned off. The program’s attempts
to “help” you can be more frustrating than helpful; it might cause you to make
more errors in your outline than you would if you formatted it yourself.
Write and Label Your Specific Purpose at the Top of Your
­Preparation Outline  Unless your instructor directs you to do otherwise,
do not work the specific purpose into the outline itself. Instead, label it and place
it at the top of the outline. Your specific purpose can serve as a yardstick by
which to measure the relevance of each main idea and piece of supporting mate-
rial. Everything in the speech should contribute to your purpose.
Add the Blueprint, Key Signposts, and an Introduction and
Conclusion to Your Outline  Place the introduction after the specific
purpose, the blueprint immediately following the introduction, the conclusion
after the outline of the body of the speech, and other signposts within the out-
line. Follow your instructor’s guidelines for incorporating these elements into
your numbering system.
Once have finished your preparation outline, you can use it to help analyze
and possibly revise the speech. The How To box lists key questions that can help
you in this critical thinking task.
Evaluate Your Speech Using Your Preparation Outline
Ask these five questions about your preparation outline as you analyze and revise your speech:
•	 Does the speech as outlined fulfill the purpose you have specified?  If not, you need to revise
the specific purpose or change the direction and content of the speech itself.
•	 Are the main ideas logical extensions (natural divisions, reasons, or steps) of the central idea? 
If not, revise either the central idea or the main ideas.
•	 Do the signposts enhance the comfortable flow of each idea into the next?  If not, change or
add previews, summaries, or transitions.
•	 Does each subpoint provide support for the point under which it falls?  If not, then either move
or delete the subpoint.
•	 Is your outline form correct?  For a quick reference, look at Figure 9.4.
How
To
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 202 11/11/14 4:57 PM
203
Outlining Your Speech 9.4
Sample Preparation Outline
The sample outline in this chapter is for a ten-minute persuasive speech by stu-
dent speaker Brianne Geise.23 Notice that in this example, the purpose, introduc-
tion, blueprint, signposts, conclusion, and references are included but separated
from the numbered points in the body of the speech.
Because Brianne kept good records during the preliminary bibliogra-
phy stage of her research (see Chapter 8), she can easily cite her references, as
­
required by her instructor. As explained in Chapter 4, the two most common
­
reference formats, or documentation styles, are those developed by the MLA
(Modern Language Association) and the APA (American Psychological Association).
MLA style is usually used in the humanities, APA style in the natural and social
sciences. Check with your instructor about which format he or she prefers.
Purpose
At the end of my speech, the audience will be take steps to ensure
that colleges and universities provide counseling along with access to
emergency contraception.
Sample Preparation Outline
Placing the purpose statement
at the top of the outline
helps the speaker to keep it
in mind. But always follow
your instructor’s specific
requirements for how to format
your preparation outline.
Brianne catches her listeners’
attention by opening her
presentation with an illustration.
Other strategies for effectively
getting audience attention are
discussed in Chapter 10.
Introduction
Students at Shippensburg University in Pennsylvania can visit their
student health center for emergency contraception without ever coming
into any contact with any of the center’s staff. A simple visit to a vending
machine is enough. Time in 2012 explains that Shippensburg University
is one institution that allows access to Plan B, known as an emergency
contraceptive, without counseling. While this plan allows students to have
liberation and independence regarding their sexual health, it does so at a
very high cost. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 2013
indicates that one-fourth of morning-after pill users fall between ages 20
and 24, meaning that many university students are both purchasing and
using the medication. Because of the magnitude of the problem, and
because I am concerned with my health as well as that of my peers, it
is imperative that we consider the discussion regarding access to the
morning-after pill and the effects that it has regarding our own health.
Brianne writes out and
labels her central idea and
preview, which together form
the blueprint of her speech.
Again, follow your instructor’s
requirements for what to include
in and how to label the various
components of your outline.
Central Idea
The Food and Drug Administration should require that any over-the-
counter purchase of the morning-after pill on a university campus be
accompanied by a consultation.
Preview
As we consider the discussion regarding access to the morning-after
pill and the effects that it has on our health, we’ll see that every student
deserves both access and information.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 203 11/11/14 4:57 PM
204 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.4
A.	The first problem is the ready accessibility of the morning-after pill.
1.	 According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in
2013, purchase of the morning-after pill has increased, especially
among women ages 20 to 24.
2.	 The Shippensburg University Web site in 2013 states that to
meet the requirement for making emergency contraception read-
ily available to students, it has provided the vending machine for
the Plan B pill for more than three years.
3.	 In January 2013, the Boston Globe reported that after visiting the
Shippensburg campus, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
concluded that although it is not technically “over the counter,”
the vending machine should stay.
Subpoints 1, 2, and 3 provide
supporting material, with oral
citations, for A.
The first main point of the
speech, which explores the
problems associated with
emergency contraceptives, is
indicated by the Roman numeral
I. The two specific problems are
indicated by A and B.
Body Outline
I.  First, let’s consider several problems associated with this issue.
B.	Ease of access without required consultation comes at a heavy
cost: Many students guess on their own how to use the pill, or sim-
ply don’t know enough to use it effectively. Drs. Chris
Kahlenborn and Walter Severs explain, in the 2013 Cleveland Clinic
Journal of Medicine, that misconceptions about the
morning-after pill are perpetuated by the ease of access to the pill.
1.	 One misconception is that the morning-after pill is equivalent to
an abortion pill.
2.	 A second misconception is that the 72-hour window is a recom-
mendation rather than a requirement.
	 Signpost. Because of students’ misconceptions, and because
they don’t have access to ask questions or address these con-
cerns, they are left in the dark. Fortunately, there is a solution that
you and I can enact together to safeguard our own health as well
as each other’s.
The signpost summarizes the
problem explained in B and its
effects, as well as previewing a
solution.
II.	 The solution is for the FDA to mandate counseling for over-the-counter
purchase of the morning-after pill on all college campuses. This is
important for several reasons.
A.	The first is that current students at Shippensburg University would
no longer be missing out on the vital information that they deserve
as consumers.
B.	In addition, with the FDA deciding in January 2013 that the vending
machine is an acceptable means for the purchase of the morning-
after pill, many other campuses may decide to use this strategy.
These students too deserve the necessary information.
	
C.	Finally, this solution allows for an important channel of communica-
tion and conversation about sexual health, including that Plan B is
an emergency contraceptive and should not replace other forms of
birth control.
In her conclusion, Brianne first
summarizes her main ideas
and then reaffirms her central
idea. Finally, she encourages
her audience to take a specific
action.
Conclusion
In conclusion, it is easy to see problems with both ease of Plan B
accessibility and risk. It is imperative that the FDA requires consultation
with over-the-counter purchases of these medications. Thanks to our
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 204 11/11/14 4:57 PM
205
Outlining Your Speech 9.4
friends at Shippensburg University, we may never think of vending
machines in the same way again—but it is important to understand that
convenience can sometimes come at a cost. It is important that we keep
ourselves and our campuses safe. Join me by signing my petition to
ensure that our safety and health come first, because giving students’
health a “college try” is just not safe enough.
References
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (November 2013). Com-
mittee opinion: Access to emergency contraception. Retrieved from http://www
.acog.org/Resources_And_Publications
Associated Press (2013, January 25). FDA won’t regulate PA birth control machine.
Retrieved from http://www.boston.com/news/nation/2013/01/25/fda-wont-
regulate-birth-control-machine/As16uxqSxiCm6G0YGN1YTK/story.html.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (February 2013). Use of emer-
gency contraception among women aged 15–44. United States. 2006–2010.
Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db112.htm.
Kahelnborn, C., & Severs, W. (2012). Emergency contraception. Cleveland Clinic
Journal of Medicine, 80(3), 185.
Shippensburg University. Etter health center. Retrieved from http://www.ship.edu/
Health_Center/
Springer, K. (2012, February 8). Pennsylvania college sells “morning after” pills in
vending machine. Time. Retrieved from http://newsfeed.time.com/2012/02/08/
pennsylvania-college-sells-morning-after-pills-in-vending-machine
Developing Your Speaking Notes
As you rehearse your speech, you will find that you need your preparation out-
line less and less. Both the structure and the content of your speech will become
set in your mind. At this point, you are ready to prepare a shorter outline to
serve as your speaking notes.
Although your speaking notes should not be so detailed that you will be
tempted to read rather than speak to your audience, this outline should pro-
vide detail sufficient to ensure that you can make your presentation as you have
planned in your preparation outline. Format your speaking notes clearly. NASA
blamed the loss of the space shuttle Columbia in part on the fact that an ­
outline on
possible wing damage was “so crammed with nested bullet points and ­
irregular
short forms that it was nearly impossible to untangle.”24
Figure 9.5 illustrates speaking notes for Brianne’s presentation on emer-
gency contraception. Here are a few specific suggestions for developing your
own speaking notes.
Choose Your Technology  Speaking notes can be high tech or low tech.
You may decide to display your outline on a laptop or electronic tablet—perhaps
utilizing one of several apps available for speaking notes—or you may opt to
use old-fashioned note cards. Even if you plan to use an electronic option, you
may want to have a backup outline on note cards in case of technical difficulty.
Following her instructor’s
requirements, Brianne includes
in her preparation outline a list
of her references, formatted in
APA style.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 205 11/11/14 4:57 PM
206 Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
9.4
Note cards don’t rustle as paper does and are small enough to hold in one hand.
Write on one side only, and number your cards in case they get out of order just
before or during your speech. Regardless of which technology you select, make
sure your letters and words are large enough to be read easily.
Use Standard Outline Form  Standard outline form will help you find
your exact place when you glance down at your speaking notes. You will know,
for example, that your second main idea is indicated by “II.” In addition lay out
your outline so that your introduction, each main idea, and your conclusion are
distinct.
I. Problems
A. Ready accessibility
1. CDC, 2013: Purchase has increased, espec. ages 20–24.
2. Shippensburg U Web, 2013: To meet requirement for making emergency
contraception readily available to students, has provided vending machine
for pill > 3 years.
3. Boston Globe, Jan. 2013: After visiting Shippensburg, FDA concluded
that although not technically “over the counter,” the vending machine
should stay.
(Pause; look at audience.)
B. Heavy cost:
• Guess on their own, or
• Don’t know enough to use effectively.
• Drs. Chris Kahlenborn and Walter Severs, 2012 Cleveland Clinic Journal
of Medicine: Misconceptions perpetuated by ease of access.
1. Misconception 1: Morning-after pill = abortion pill.
2. Misconception 2: 72-hour window is recommendation rather than
requirement.
Signpost. Because of students’ misconceptions, and because they don’t have
access to ask questions or address these concerns, they are left in the dark.
Fortunately, there is a solution that you and I can enact together to safeguard our
own health as well as each other’s.
Figure 9.5  Your speaking notes can include delivery cues and reminders. Be
sure to differentiate your cues from the content of your speech. One good way is
to write speaking cues in a different color ink or font.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 206 11/11/14 4:57 PM
207
Outlining Your Speech 9.4
Include Your Introduction and Conclusion in Abbreviated
Form  Even if your instructor does not require you to include your introduc-
tion and conclusion on your preparation outline, include abbreviated versions of
them in your speaking notes. You might even feel more comfortable delivering
the presentation if you have your first and last sentences written out in front of
you.
Include Your Central Idea But Not Your Purpose State-
ment  Be sure to include your central idea. But as you will not actually say
your purpose statement during your presentation, do not put it on your speak-
ing notes.
Include Supporting Material And Signposts  Write out in full any
statistics and direct quotations and their sources. Write your key signposts—
your initial preview, for example—to ensure that you will not have to grope
awkwardly as you move from one idea to another.
Include Delivery Cues  Writing in your speaking notes such cues as
“Louder,” “Pause,” or “Walk two steps left” will remind you to communicate
the nonverbal messages you have planned. Write your delivery cues in a dif-
ferent color or font so that you don’t confuse them with your verbal content.
President Gerald Ford once accidentally read the delivery cue “Look into the
right camera” during a speech. Clearly differentiating delivery cues from speech
content will help prevent such mistakes.
Quick Check
Two Types of Speech Outlines
Preparation Outline 	Allows speaker to examine speech for completeness,
unity, coherence, and overall effectiveness. May serve as
first rehearsal outline.
Speaking Notes 	Include supporting material, signposts, and delivery cues.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 207 11/11/14 4:57 PM
208 Chapter 9 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
9.1	 List and describe five patterns for organizing the main ideas of a
speech.
Organizing the main ideas of your speech in a logical way will help audience
members follow, understand, and remember these ideas. For North American
audiences, the five most common patterns of organization are topical, chrono-
logical, spatial, cause and effect, and problem–solution. These patterns are
sometimes combined. Other organizational patterns may be favored in different
cultures. The principles of primacy, recency, and complexity can also help you
decide which main idea to discuss first, next, and last.
Key Terms
Topical organization
Primacy
Recency
Complexity
Chronological
 organization
Spatial organization
Cause-and-effect
 organization
Problem–solution
 organization
9.2	 Explain how to integrate supporting material into a speech.
You can organize the supporting material for each main idea of your speech
­
according to one of the five common patterns or according to such strategies as
primacy, recency, specificity, complexity, or soft-to-hard evidence.
Key Terms
Soft evidence
Hard evidence
9.3	 Use verbal and nonverbal signposts to organize a speech for the ears of
others.
Previews, transitions, and summaries are three major types of signposts that can
help you communicate the organization of your speech to your audience.
Key Terms
Signposts
Preview
Initial preview
Internal preview
Transition
Verbal transition
Nonverbal transition
Summary
Final summary
Internal summary
9.4	 Develop a preparation outline and speaking notes for a speech.
A preparation outline includes your carefully organized main ideas, subpoints,
and supporting material; it may also include your specific purpose, introduc-
tion, blueprint, internal previews and summaries, transitions, and conclusion.
Write each of these elements in complete sentences and standard outline form.
Use the preparation outline to begin rehearsing your speech and to help you
revise it, if necessary.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 208 11/11/14 4:57 PM
209
Chapter 9 study guide
After you have rehearsed several times from your preparation outline, you
are ready to prepare speaking notes. Although less detailed than a preparation
outline, speaking notes usually include supporting material, signposts, and de-
livery cues.
Key Terms
Preparation outline
Speaking notes
Mapping
Standard outline form
Think about These Questions
•	 Identify the organizational pattern that is used for the main ideas of this
speech. Do you think the speaker also considered primacy, recency, or
­
complexity? If so, which one?
Purpose statement:	
At the end of my speech, the audience will be able to
explain three theories about what happened to the
dinosaurs.
Central idea:	
There are at least three distinct theories about what
happened to the dinosaurs.
Main ideas:	   
I.  A large asteroid hit the Earth.
  
II.  A gradual climate shift occurred.
III. 
The level of oxygen in the atmosphere
gradually changed.
•	 Can a speaker legitimately claim that a speech is extemporaneous if he or
she has constructed a detailed preparation outline? Explain your answer.
•	 Myorka thinks that it’s silly to worry about using correct outline form for
either her preparation outline or her speaking notes. Do you agree with
her? Give at least two reasons for your answer.
M09_BEEB3981_05_SE_C09_181-210.indd 209 11/11/14 4:57 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
211
Chapter 10
Introducing
Your Speech
“The average per-
son thinks about
what he has said;
the above aver-
age person about
what he is going
to say.”
—Anonymous
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 211 11/11/14 4:58 PM
212 Introducing Your Speech
10
Learning Objectives
	10.1	Explain the functions of a speech introduction.
	10.2	List and discuss methods for introducing a speech.
Like all teachers, public speaking instructors have pet peeves when it comes to
their students’ work. Of the pet peeves that public-speaking teachers identified
in a recent study, more than 25 percent relate to introductions and conclusions.
Peeves about introductions include the following:
•	 Beginning a speech with “OK, ah . . .”
•	 Apologizing or making excuses at the beginning of the speech for not being
prepared
•	 Beginning a speech with “Hello, my speech is on . . .”1
Of course, not every public-speaking instructor considers all of the above to be
pet peeves or even tactics to be avoided. But the fact that they appear on this
list suggests that you will probably want to consider alternatives. After all, your
introduction provides your listeners with an important first impression of both
you and your speech.
Like many speakers, you might think that the first task in preparing a
speech is to start drafting your introduction. In fact, the introduction is more of-
ten the last part of the speech you develop. A key purpose of your introduction
is to provide an overview of your message. How can you do that until you know
what the message is going to be?
	10.1	Purposes of Introductions
Get the Audience’s Attention
Give the Audience a Reason to
Listen
Introduce the Subject
Establish Your Credibility
Preview Your Main Ideas
	10.2	Effective Introductions
Illustrations or Anecdotes
Startling Facts or Statistics
Quotations
Humor
Questions
References to Historical Events
References to Recent Events
Personal References
References to the Occasion
References to Preceding Speeches
Outline
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 212 11/11/14 4:58 PM
213
Purposes of Introductions 10.1
Organizing the body of your speech should precede the crafting of the intro-
duction. In Chapter 9, we discussed strategies for organizing the body of your
speech; using previews, transitions, and summaries to signpost your speech for
your audience; and developing a presentation outline and speaking notes. In
this chapter, we will complete our discussion of speech organization by discuss-
ing introductions.
Purposes of Introductions
10.1	 Explain the functions of a speech introduction.
Within a few seconds of meeting a person, you form a first impression that is
often quite lasting. So, too, do you form a first impression of a speaker and his or
her message within the opening seconds of a speech. The introduction may con-
vince you to listen carefully because this is a credible speaker presenting a well-
prepared speech, or it may send the message that the speaker is ill-prepared and
the message is not worth your time. In a ten-minute speech, the introduction
will probably last no more than a minute and a half. To say that the introduction
needs to be well planned is an understatement, considering how important and
yet how brief this portion of any speech is.
As a speaker, your task is to ensure that your introduction convinces your
audience to listen to you. Specifically, a good introduction must perform five
important functions:
•	 Get the audience’s attention.
•	 Give the audience a reason to listen.
•	 Introduce the subject.
•	 Establish your credibility.
•	 Preview your main ideas.
Let’s examine each of these five functions in more detail.
Get the Audience’s Attention
A key purpose of the introduction is to gain favorable attention for your speech.
Because listeners form their first impressions of the speech quickly, if the intro-
duction does not capture their attention and cast the speech in a favorable light,
the rest of the speech may be wasted on them. The speaker who walks to the po-
dium and drones, “Today I am going to talk to you about . . .” has probably lost
most of the audience in those first few boring words. Some specific ways to gain
the attention of audiences will be discussed later in this chapter.
We emphasize favorable attention for a very good reason. It is possible to
gain an audience’s attention but in so doing to alienate them or disgust them
so that they become irritated instead of interested in what you have to say. For
10.1
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 213 11/11/14 4:58 PM
214 Introducing Your Speech
10.1
example, a student began a pro-life speech with a graphic description of the
abortion process. She caught her audience’s attention but made them so uncom-
fortable that they could hardly concentrate on the rest of her speech.
Another student gave a speech on the importance of donating blood. Without
a word, he began by appearing to savagely slash his wrists in front of his stunned
audience. As blood spurted, audience members screamed, and one fainted. The
blood was real blood, but it wasn’t his. The speaker worked at a blood bank,
and he was using the bank’s blood. He had placed a device under each arm that
­
allowed him to pump out the blood as if from his wrists. He certainly captured his
audience’s attention! But they never heard his message. The shock and disgust of
seeing such a display made that impossible. He did not gain favorable attention.
The moral of our two tales: By all means, be creative in your speech introduc-
tions. But also use common sense in deciding how best to gain the favorable atten-
tion of your audience members. Alienating them is even worse than boring them.
Give the Audience a Reason to Listen
Even after you have captured your listeners’ attention, you have to give them
some reason to want to listen to the rest of your speech. An unmotivated listener
quickly tunes out. You can help to establish listening motivation by showing the
members of your audience how the topic affects them directly.
In Chapter 8, we presented seven criteria for determining the ­
effectiveness of
your supporting material. One of those criteria for determining the ­
effectiveness
of your supporting material is proximity, the degree to which the information
affects your listeners directly. Just as proximity is important to ­
supporting
­
materials, it is important to speech introductions. “This concerns me” is a
­
powerful reason to listen. Notice how Lauren involved her listeners firsthand
with abhorrent labor conditions in Florida tomato fields:
[If] you’ve eaten a tomato from a fast-food restaurant, grocery store, or
food services business in the last year, you’ve eaten a tomato picked by
the hand of a slave. [She shows two tomatoes to the audience.] Can you
tell which one? Now I know I’m taking a chance here offering tomatoes
to an audience at the beginning of a speech. But the difference between
these two is the difference between a fair market and slavery.2
Sheena also used proximity to motivate her audience to empathize with
people who suffer from exposure to toxic mold:
Headaches, fatigue, dizziness, and memory impairment seem like ail-
ments that each person in this room has had at one point, right? You stay
up late cramming for an exam. The next day, you are fatigued, dizzy, and
cannot remember the answers.3
It does not matter so much how or when you demonstrate proximity. But
it is essential that, like Lauren and Sheena, you do at some point establish that
your topic is of vital personal concern to your listeners.
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 214 11/11/14 4:58 PM
215
Purposes of Introductions 10.1
Introduce the Subject
Perhaps the most obvious purpose of an introduction is to introduce the subject
of a speech. Within a few seconds after you begin your speech, the audience
should have a pretty good idea of what you are going to talk about. Do not get
so carried away with jokes or illustrations that you forget this basic purpose.
Few things will frustrate your audience more than having to wait until halfway
through your speech to figure out what you are talking about! The best way to
ensure that your introduction does indeed introduce the subject of your speech
is to include a statement of your central idea in the introduction. For example, in
introducing his speech on the needs of the aged, this speaker immediately estab-
lished his subject and central idea:
If you take away just one thing from what I have to say, I hope you’ll
come to understand in the next few minutes that the exploding popu-
lation of seniors demands a conscious, considered, and collaborative
response to plan for the health, financial, and social implications of an
older population.4
Establish Your Credibility
A credible speaker is one whom the audience judges to be a believable authority
and a competent speaker. A credible speaker is also someone the audience be-
lieves they can trust. As you begin your speech, you should be mindful of your
listeners’ attitudes toward you. Ask yourself, “Why should they listen to me?
What is my background with respect to the topic? Am I personally committed to
the issues about which I am going to speak?”
Nineteenth-century abolitionist Frederick Douglass was renowned as a
great orator. According to biographer Charles W. Chestnutt, Douglass’s audi-
ences recognized him as
a man whose . . . past history gave him the highest right to describe and
denounce the iniquities of slavery and contend for the rights of a race.5
Likewise, when the Pope travels abroad, people travel great distances and
stand for hours in extreme heat or cold to celebrate Mass with him. But most of
us cannot take our own credibility for granted when we speak. If you can estab-
lish your credibility early in a speech, it will help to motivate your audience to
listen. Here are three strategies you can use:
•	 Be well prepared. You will feel more confident if you have carefully researched
and thoroughly rehearsed your speech. If you seem to have confidence in
yourself, your audience will have confidence in you.
•	 Appear confident. Speaking fluently while maintaining eye contact does
much to convey a sense of confidence.
•	 Tell the audience of your personal experience with your topic.Instead of thinking
you boastful, most audience members will listen to you with respect. Twitter
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 215 11/11/14 4:58 PM
216 Introducing Your Speech
10.1
CEO Dick Costolo opened his 2013 University of ­
Michigan commencement
speech by photographing the graduates, then telling them as he tweeted the
photo, “I’m a professional, so this will only take a second.”6
Preview Your Main Ideas
A final purpose of the introduction is to preview the main ideas of your speech.
As you saw in Chapter 9, an initial preview statement usually comes near the
end of the introduction, included in or immediately following a statement of
the central idea. The preview statement allows your listeners to anticipate the
main ideas of your speech, which in turn helps to ensure that they will remem-
ber those ideas after the speech.
As we also noted in Chapter 9, an initial preview statement is an organiza-
tional strategy called a signpost. Just as signs posted along a highway tell you
what is coming up, a signpost in your speech tells the listeners what to expect
by enumerating the ideas or points that you plan to present. If, for example, you
were giving a speech about racial profiling, you might say:
To end these crimes against color, we must first paint an accurate picture
of the problem, then explore the causes, and finally establish solutions
that will erase the practice of racial profiling.7
Quick Check
Does Your Introduction Accomplish Its Purpose?
Does Your Introduction . . .
Get your audience’s attention?
Give your audience a reason to listen?
Introduce your subject?
Establish your credibility?
Preview your main ideas?
To Make Sure It Does . . .
Use an illustration, a startling fact or
statistic, a quotation, humor, a ques-
tion, a reference to an historical event
or to a recent event, a personal refer-
ence, a reference to the occasion, or a
reference to a preceding speech.
Tell your listeners how the topic directly
affects them.
Present your central idea to your
­audience.
Offer your credentials. Tell your listen-
ers about your commitment to your
topic.
Tell your audience what you are going
to tell them.
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 216 11/11/14 4:58 PM
217
Effective Introductions 10.2
Identifying your main ideas helps to organize the message and enhances listeners’
learning.
The introduction to your speech, then, should get your audience’s ­
attention,
give the audience a reason to listen, introduce the subject, establish your
­
credibility, and preview your main ideas. All this—and brevity too—might seem
impossible to achieve. But it isn’t!
Effective Introductions
10.2	 List and discuss methods for introducing a speech.
With a little practice, you will be able to write satisfactory central ideas and pre-
view statements. It may be more difficult to gain your audience’s attention and
give them a reason to listen to you. Fortunately, there are several effective meth-
ods for developing speech introductions. Not every method is appropriate for
every speech, but chances are that you can discover among these alternatives at
least one type of introduction to fit the topic and purpose of your speech, what-
ever they might be. We will discuss ten ways of introducing a speech:
•	 Illustrations or anecdotes
•	 Startling facts or statistics
•	 Quotations
•	 Humor
•	 Questions
•	 References to historical events
•	 References to recent events
•	 Personal references
•	 References to the occasion
•	 References to preceding speeches
Illustrations or Anecdotes
Not surprisingly, because it is the most inherently interesting type of supporting
material, an illustration or anecdote can provide the basis for an effective speech
introduction. In fact, if you have an especially compelling illustration that you
had planned to use in the body of the speech, you might do well to use it in your
introduction instead. A relevant and interesting anecdote will introduce your
subject and almost invariably gain an audience’s attention. Student speaker
Matt opened his speech on the dangers associated with the chemical BPA with
this extended illustration:
Three years ago Algeta McDonald’s life was taken by breast cancer.
She was an absolutely amazing Italian-American woman, who was
10.2
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 217 11/11/14 4:58 PM
218 Introducing Your Speech
10.2
completely stubborn, but she always brought out the best in anyone she
was around. Here was a woman who always ate proper foods and was
conscientious of her health in general, every day of her life.
Ask anyone who knew her well what their favorite memory of­Algeta
was, and I can almost guarantee it’s of her carrying around a bright red
Nalgene water bottle. This way, she could get her 64 daily ounces of ­water
with certainty. Unfortunately, this happy memory of how she ­
always had
her water bottle might change with some information that has come to
light recently.8
Matt’s story effectively captured the attention of his audience and introduced
the subject of his speech.
Startling Facts or Statistics
A second method of introducing a speech is to use a startling fact or statistic.
Startling an audience with the extent of a situation or problem invariably catches
listeners’ attention, motivates them to listen further, and helps them remember
afterward what you had to say. Will’s audience of prospective law students must
have been startled to attention by this statistic in his introduction:
98 percent of the 2012 graduates of the Thomas Jefferson School of Law
in San Diego, California, graduated with an average of $168,800 in
­student debt.9
Quotations
Using an appropriate quotation to introduce a speech is a common practice.
­
Often, another writer or speaker has expressed an opinion on your topic that
is more authoritative, comprehensive, or memorable than what you can say.
­
Terrika opened her speech on the importance of community with a quotation
from poet Johari Kungufu:
Sisters, Men
What are we doin?
What about the babies, our children?
When we was real we never had orphans or children in joints.
Come spirits
drive out the nonsense from our minds and the crap from our dreams
make us remember what we need, that children are the next life.
bring us back to the real
bring us back to the real
“The Real.” Johari Kungufu, in her poem, specifically alludes to a time in
African history when children were not confused about who they were.10
A different kind of quotation, this one from an expert, was chosen by
another speaker to introduce the topic of the disappearance of childhood in
America:
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 218 11/11/14 4:58 PM
219
Effective Introductions 10.2
“As a distinctive childhood culture wastes away, we watch with fascina-
tion and dismay.” This insight of Neil Postman, author of Disappearance of
Childhood, raised a poignant point. Childhood in America is vanishing.11
Because the expert was not widely recognized, the speaker included a brief state-
ment of his qualifications. This authority “said it in a nutshell”—he ­
expressed in
concise language the central idea of the speech.
Although a quote can effectively introduce a speech, do not fall into the lazy
habit of turning to a collection of quotations every time you need an introduc-
tion. There are so many other interesting, and sometimes better, ways to intro-
duce a speech that quotes should be used only if they are extremely interesting,
compelling, or very much to the point.
Like the methods of organization discussed in Chapter 9, the methods of
introduction are not mutually exclusive. Very often, two or three are effectively
combined in a single introduction. For example, Thad combined a quotation
and an illustration for this effective introduction to a speech on the funeral
industry:
“Dying is a very dull, dreary affair. And my advice to you is to have
nothing whatsoever to do with it.” These lingering words by British
playwright Somerset Maugham were meant to draw a laugh. Yet the
ironic truth to the statement has come to epitomize the grief of many,
including Jan Berman of Martha’s Vineyard. In a recent interview with
National Public Radio, we learn that Ms. Berman desired to have a home
funeral for her mother. She possessed a burial permit and was legally
within her rights. But when a local funeral director found out, he lied to
her, telling her that what she was doing was illegal.12
Humor
Humor, handled well, can be a wonderful attention getter. It can help to relax
your audience and win their goodwill for the rest of the speech. University of
Texas Professor of Journalism Marvin Olasky told this humorous story to open a
speech on disaster response:
Let me begin with a Texas story about how officials do offer help. It
starts with a mom on a farm looking out the window. She sees the family
cow munching on grass and her daughter talking with a strange man.
The mom furiously yells out the window, “Didn’t I tell you not to talk to
strangers? You come in this house right now.” The girl offers a protest:
“But mama, this man says he’s a United States senator.” The wise mother
replies, “In that case, come in this house right now, and bring the cow in
with you.”
Let’s talk about responses to disaster.13
Another speaker used humor to express appreciation for being invited to
speak to a group by beginning his speech with this story:
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 219 11/11/14 4:58 PM
220 Introducing Your Speech
10.2
Three corporate executives were trying to define the word fame.
One said, “Fame is getting invited to the White House to see the
President.”
The second one said, “Fame is being invited to the White House and
while you are visiting, the phone rings and he doesn’t answer it.”
The third executive said, “You’re both wrong. Fame is being invited
to the White House to visit with the President when his Hot Line rings.
He answers it, listens a minute, and then says, ‘Here, it’s for you!’ ”
Being asked to speak today is like being in the White House and the
call’s for me.14
Subtle Humor  Humor need not always be the slapstick comedy of the
Three Stooges. It does not even have to be a joke. It may take more subtle forms,
such as irony or incredulity. When General Douglas MacArthur, an honor grad-
uate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, returned to West Point in 1962,
he delivered his now-famous “Farewell to the Cadets.” He opened that speech
with this humorous anecdote:
As I was leaving the hotel this morning, a doorman asked me, “Where
are you bound for, General?” And when I replied, “West Point,” he
­
remarked, “Beautiful place. Have you ever been there before?”15
MacArthur’s brief story caught the audience’s attention and made them laugh—
in short, it was an effective way to open the speech.
Humor And Diversity  If your audience is linguistically diverse or com-
posed primarily of listeners whose first language is not English, you might want to
choose an introduction strategy other than humor. Because much humor is created
by verbal plays on words, people who do not speak English as their native lan-
guage might not perceive the humor in an anecdote or quip that you intended to be
funny. And humor rarely translates well, as is evident from the following anecdote:
. . . an Australian news anchor who was interviewing the Dalai Lama
with the aid of an interpreter opened the exchange with a joke: “The ­
Dalai
Lama walks into a pizza shop and says, “Can you make me one with
­
everything?” His Holiness’s baffled state, viewed by nearly two million
people on YouTube, presents a lesson in the risks of translating humor.16
Just as certain audiences may preclude your use of a humorous introduc-
tion, so may certain subjects—for example, Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and
rape. Used with discretion, however, humor can provide a lively, interesting,
and appropriate introduction for many speeches.
Questions
Remember the pet peeves listed at the beginning of this chapter? Another pet
peeve for some is beginning a speech with a question (“How many of you . . . ?”).
The problem is not so much the strategy itself but the lack of mindfulness in the
“How many of you . . . ?” phrasing.
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 220 11/11/14 4:58 PM
221
Effective Introductions 10.2
A thoughtful rhetorical question, on the other hand, can prompt your lis-
teners’ mental participation in your introduction, getting their attention and
giving them a reason to listen. President and CEO of Coca-Cola, Muhtar Kent,
began a speech to investors and financial analysts by asking,
Are we ready for tomorrow, today?17
And Richard opened his speech on teenage suicide with this simple question:
Have you ever been alone in the dark?18
Delivering Your Question  To turn questions into an effective introduc-
tion, the speaker must do more than just think of good questions to ask. He or
she must also deliver the questions effectively. The How To box offers you some
delivery tips.
Responding To Audience Responses  Although it does not happen fre-
quently, an audience member might blurt out a vocal response to a question that
was intended to be rhetorical. If you plan to open a speech with a rhetorical
question, be aware of this possibility and plan possible appropriate reactions.
If the topic is light, a Jay Leno–style return quip can win over the audience and
turn the interruption into an asset. If the topic is more serious or the interruption
is inappropriate or contrary to what you expected, you might reply with some-
thing like “Perhaps most of the rest of you were thinking . . . ,” or you might
answer the question yourself.
Using Questions With Other Introduction Methods Questions
are commonly combined with another method of introduction. For example,
University of Akron president Luis Proenza opened a speech on new strategies
for success in higher education with a question followed by a startling statistic:
What if the airplane had advanced as far and as fast as the computer?
­
Today’s jumbo jet would carry one hundred thousand passengers, and
it would fly them to the moon and back for $12.50 at 23,400 miles per
hour.19
Deliver an Opening Question
•	 Use a pause.  Pause briefly after each question so that audience members have time to try to
formulate a mental answer. After all, the main advantage of questions as an introductory tech-
nique is to hook the audience by getting them to engage in a mental dialogue with you.
•	 Use eye contact.  You may look down at your notes while you ask the question, but effective
delivery requires looking back up to reestablish eye contact with listeners. As we discuss in
Chapter 13, eye contact signals that the communication channel is open. Establishing eye
contact with your audience following a question also gives them additional motivation to think
of an answer.
How
To
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 221 11/11/14 4:58 PM
222 Introducing Your Speech
10.2
Either by themselves or in tandem with another method of introduction,
questions can provide effective openings for speeches. Like quotations, how-
ever, questions can also be crutches for speakers who have not taken the time to
explore other options. Unless you can think of a truly engaging question, work
to develop one of the other introduction strategies.
References to Historical Events
What American is not familiar with the opening line of Lincoln’s classic Gettysburg
Address: “Four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth on this
­
continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition
that all men are created equal.” Lincoln’s famous opening sentence refers to the
historical context of the speech. You, too, may find a way to begin a speech by
making a reference to a historical event.
Every day is the anniversary of something. Perhaps you could begin a
speech by drawing a relationship between a historical event that happened on
this day and your speech objective. Executive speechwriter Cynthia Starks illus-
trated this strategy in a speech delivered on February 16:
On this date—Feb. 16, 1923—archaeologist Howard Carter entered the
burial chamber of King Tutankhamen. There he found a solid gold cof-
fin, Tut’s intact mummy, and priceless treasures.
On Feb. 16, 1959, Fidel Castro took over the Cuban government
45 days after overthrowing Fulgencio Batista.
And America’s first 9-1-1 emergency phone system went live in
Haleyville, Alabama, on Feb. 16, 1968.
Today, I won’t be revealing priceless treasures. I promise not to over-
throw anyone, or generate any 9-1-1 calls. But I do hope to reveal a few
speechwriting secrets, provide a little revolutionary thinking and a sense
of urgency about the speeches you ought to be giving.20
To discover anniversaries of historical events, you can search “This Day in
History” in your Web browser or download it as an app for your tablet or
smartphone.
References to Recent Events
If your topic is timely, a reference to a recent event can be a good way to be-
gin your speech. An opening taken from a recent news story can take the form
of an illustration, a startling statistic, or even a quotation, giving the additional
advantages discussed under each of those methods of introduction. Moreover,
referring to a recent event increases your credibility by showing that you are
knowledgeable about current affairs.
“Recent” does not necessarily mean a story that broke just last week or even
last month. An event that occurred within the past year or so can be considered
recent. Even a particularly significant event that is slightly older can qualify. The
key, says one speaker,
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 222 11/11/14 4:58 PM
223
Effective Introductions 10.2
is to avoid being your grandfather. No more stories about walking uphill
both ways to school with a musket on your back and seventeen Redcoats
chasing you. Be in the now, and connect with your audience.21
Personal References
A reference to yourself can take several forms. You might express appreciation
or pleasure at having been asked to speak, as did this speaker:
I am delighted to participate in this engaging meeting at my graduating
alma mater.22
Or you might share a personal experience, as did this speaker:
Like some of you in the audience, I’ve held many jobs before finding
my true calling, from washing cars to waiting tables and taking care of
animals . . .23
Although personal references take a variety of forms, what they do best, in all
circumstances, is to establish a bond between you and your audience.
References to the Occasion
References to the occasion are often made at weddings, birthday parties, dedi-
cation ceremonies, and other such events. For example, New Jersey Governor
Chris Christie opened his 2013 “state of the state” address this way:
Since George Washington delivered the first State of the Union in New
York on this day in 1790, it has been the tradition of executive leaders to
report on the condition of the nation and state at the beginning of the
legislative year. So it is my honor and pleasure to give you this report on
the state of our state.24
The reference to the occasion can also be combined with other methods of intro-
duction, such as an illustration or a rhetorical question.
References to Preceding Speeches
If your speech is one of several being presented on the same occasion, such as
in a speech class, at a symposium, or as part of a lecture series, you will usually
not know until shortly before your own speech what other speakers will say.
Few experiences will make your stomach sink faster than hearing a speaker just
ahead of you speak on your topic. Worse still, that speaker might even use some
of the same supporting materials you had planned to use.
When this situation occurs, you must decide on the spot whether referring
to one of those previous speeches will be better than using the introduction that
you originally prepared. It may be wise to refer to a preceding speech when an-
other speaker has spoken on a topic that is so related to your own that you can
draw an analogy. In a sense, your introduction becomes a transition from that
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 223 11/11/14 4:58 PM
224 Introducing Your Speech
10.2
earlier speech to yours. Here is an example of an introduction delivered by a
fast-thinking student speaker under those circumstances:
When Juli talked to us about her experiences as a lifeguard, she stressed
that the job was not as glamorous as many of us imagine. Today I
want to tell you about another job that appears to be more glamorous
than it is—a job that I have held for two years. I am a bartender at the
Rathskeller.25
As you plan your introduction, remember that any combination of the meth-
ods just discussed is possible. With a little practice, you will become confident at
choosing from several good possibilities as you prepare your introduction.
Quick Check
Effective Introductions
•	 Use an illustration or anecdote.
•	 Present startling facts or statistics.
•	 Use an appropriate quotation.
•	 Use humor.
•	 Begin with a rhetorical question.
•	 Refer to historical events.
•	 Refer to recent events.
•	 Use personal references.
•	 Refer to the occasion.
•	 Refer to preceding speeches.
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 224 11/11/14 4:58 PM
225
Chapter 10 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
10.1	 Explain the functions of a speech introduction.
It is important to begin and end your speech in a way that is memorable and
that also provides the repetition audiences need. A good introduction gets the
audience’s attention, gives the audience a reason to listen, introduces your sub-
ject, establishes your credibility, and previews your main ideas.
Introducing your subject and previewing the body of your speech can be ac-
complished by including your central idea and initial preview in the introduction.
10.2	 List and discuss methods for introducing a speech.
You can gain favorable attention and provide a motivation for listening by using
any of the following, alone or in combination: illustrations, startling facts or sta-
tistics, quotations, humor, questions, references to historical events, references
to recent events, personal references, references to the occasion, or references to
preceding speeches, as appropriate.
Key Terms
anecdote
rhetorical question
Think about These Questions
•	 Describe how you could establish a motivation for your classroom audi-
ence to listen to you on each of the following topics: cholesterol, Elvis
­
Presley, the history of greeting cards, ozone depletion, distracted driving.
•	 Nakai is planning to give his informative speech on Native American
music, displaying and demonstrating the use of such instruments as the
flute, the Taos drum, and the Yaqui rain stick. How should he introduce his
speech?
•	 Marty and Shanna, who are in the same section of a public-speaking class,
are discussing their upcoming speeches. Marty has discovered an illustra-
tion that she thinks will make an effective introduction. When she tells
Shanna about it, Shanna is genuinely enthusiastic. In fact, she thinks it
would make a great introduction for her own speech, which is on a differ-
ent topic. When the students are given their schedules, Shanna realizes that
she will speak before Marty. She badly wants to use the introductory illus-
tration that Marty has discovered. Can she ethically do so, if she cites in her
speech the original source of the illustration?
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 225 11/11/14 4:58 PM
M10_BEEB3981_05_SE_C10_211-226.indd 226 11/11/14 4:58 PM
227
Chapter 11
Concluding Your
Speech
“A hard begin-
ning maketh a
good ending.”
—John Heywood
	11.1	Purposes of Conclusions
Summarize the Speech
Provide Closure
	11.2	Effective Conclusions
Methods also Used for
Introductions
References to the Introduction
Inspirational Appeals or
Challenges
Outline
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 227 11/17/14 12:18 PM
228 Concluding Your Speech
11.1
Learning Objectives
	11.1	Explain the functions of a speech conclusion,
	11.2	List and discuss methods for concluding a speech,
Your introduction creates an important first impression; your conclusion leaves
an equally important final impression. Long after you finish speaking, your audi-
ence is likely to remember the effect, if not the content, of your closing remarks.
Unfortunately, many speakers pay less attention to their conclusions than
to any other part of their speeches. They believe that if they can get through
the first 90 percent of a speech, they can think of some way to conclude it. Per-
haps you have had the experience of listening to a speaker who failed to plan a
conclusion. Awkward final seconds of stumbling for words may be followed by
hesitant applause from an audience that is not even sure the speech is over. It is
hardly the best way to leave people who came to listen to you.
Purposes of Conclusions
11.1	 Explain the functions of a speech conclusion.
An effective conclusion will serve two purposes: It will summarize the speech,
and it will provide closure.
Summarize the Speech
A conclusion is a speaker’s last chance to review his or her main ideas for the
audience.
Reemphasize the Central Idea in a Memorable Way  The conclu-
sions of many famous speeches rephrase the central idea in a memorable way.
When on July 4, 1939, New York Yankees legend Lou Gehrig addressed his fans
in an emotional farewell to a baseball career cut short by a diagnosis of ALS
(amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), he concluded with the memorable line,
I may have had a tough break, but I have an awful lot to live for.1
Speechwriting instructor and former speechwriter Robert Lehrman identifies a
more recent memorable conclusion, that of Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential
victory speech:
that long closing story about Ann Nixon Cooper, the 106-year-old
woman whose life encapsulated the history of the 20th century (“a man
touched down on the moon . . . she touched her finger to a screen and
cast her vote . . .”).2
11.1
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 228 11/11/14 4:59 PM
229
Purposes of Conclusions 11.1
Lehrman notes, “When I teach that speech, students stop texting and start
crying.”
But memorable endings are not the exclusive property of famous speakers.
With practice, most people can prepare similarly effective conclusions. Chapter 12
offers ideas for using language to make your statements more memorable. As a
preliminary example of the memorable use of language, here is how Noelle con-
cluded her speech on phony academic institutions on the Internet:
What we have learned from all this is that we, and only we, have
the power to stop [fraudulent learning institutions]. So we don’t get
www.conned.3
This speaker’s clever play on “dot.com” helped her audience remember her
topic and central idea.
The end of your speech is your last chance to impress the central idea on
your audience. Do it in such a way that they cannot help but remember it.
Restate the Main Ideas  In addition to reemphasizing the central idea of
the speech, the conclusion is also likely to restate the main ideas. Note how John
effectively summarized the main ideas of his speech on emissions tampering,
casting the summary as an expression of his fears about the problem and the
actions that could ease those fears:
I’m frightened. Frightened that nothing I could say would encourage
the 25 percent of emissions-tampering Americans to change their ways
and correct the factors that cause their autos to pollute disproportion-
ately. Frightened that the American public will not respond to a crucial
issue unless the harms are both immediate and observable. Frightened
that the EPA will once again prove very sympathetic to industry. Three
simple steps will alleviate my fear: inspection, reduction in lead content,
and, most importantly, awareness.4
Most speakers summarize their speech in the first part of the conclusion or as
part of the transition between the body of the speech and its conclusion.
Provide Closure
Probably the most obvious purpose of a conclusion is to bring closure—to cue
the audience that the speech is coming to an end by making it “sound finished.”
Use Verbal or Nonverbal Cues to Signal the End of the
Speech  As described in the How To box, you can use both verbal and nonver-
bal clues to let your audience know your speech is coming to the end. However,
one technique that can backfire in signaling the end of a speech is the phrase
“in conclusion.” In fact, like the techniques mentioned at the beginning of
Chapter 10, it is a pet peeve of many public-speaking instructors because of the
­
carelessness with which student speakers often use it. Like opening your speech
by asking a rhetorical question, signaling your closing by saying “in conclusion”
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 229 11/11/14 4:59 PM
230 Concluding Your Speech
11.1
is not inherently wrong, but such a cue gives listeners unspoken permission to
tune out. (Notice what students do when their professor signals the end of class:
Books and notebooks slam shut, pens are stowed away, and the class generally
stops listening.) A concluding transition needs to be followed quickly by the
final statement of the speech.
Motivate the Audience to Respond  Another way to provide closure
to your speech is to motivate your audience to respond in some way. If your
speech is informative, you may want your audience to take some sort of
appropriate action—write a letter, buy a product, make a telephone call, or
get involved in a cause. In fact, an action step is essential to the persuasive
organizational strategy called the motivated sequence, which we discuss in
Chapter 17.
At the close of her speech on negligent landlords, Melanie included a simple
audience response as part of her action step:
By a show of hands, how many people in this room rely on rental hous-
ing? Look around. It’s a problem that affects us all, if not directly, then
through a majority of our friends.5
Another speaker ended a speech to an audience of travel agents by recom-
mending these specific action steps:
•	 Continuously develop and improve your professional and business skills.
•	 Embrace and utilize the new technologies. You are either riding on the new
technology highway, or you are standing in the dust, left behind.
•	 Continuously build and strengthen your top industry organizations locally
and nationally so their brands, endorsement, and influence can work pow-
erfully on your behalf.
•	 Develop a passion for this business and inspire the same in your employees
and coworkers.6
Signal the End of Your Speech
Verbal cues
•	 Use transitional phrases such as finally, for my last point, and (use with care) in conclusion.
•	 Be careful that your cues don’t give the audience unspoken permission to tune out. Be quick
to follow your transition with the final statement of your speech.
Nonverbal cues
•	 Pause between the body of your speech and its conclusion.
•	 Slow your speaking rate.
•	 Move out from behind a podium to make a final impassioned plea.
•	 Use a falling vocal inflection to signal your final statement.
How
to
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 230 11/11/14 4:59 PM
231
Effective Conclusions 11.2
In both of the preceding examples, the speakers draw on the principle of
proximity, discussed in this chapter, to motivate their audiences. When audience
members feel that they are or could be personally involved or affected, they are
more likely to respond to your message.
Quick Check
Purposes of Your Speech Conclusion
Purpose
Summarize the speech.
Provide closure.
Technique
•	 Reemphasize the central idea in a memorable way.
•	 Restate the main ideas.
•	 Signal the end of the speech verbally or nonverbally.
•	 Motivate the audience to respond.
Effective Conclusions
11.2	 List and discuss methods for concluding a speech.
Effective conclusions may employ illustrations, quotations, personal references,
or any of the other methods of introduction we have discussed. In addition,
there are at least two other distinct ways of concluding a speech: with references
to the introduction and with inspirational appeals or challenges.
Methods also Used for Introductions
Any of the methods of introduction discussed in Chapter 10 can also help you
conclude your speech. Quotations, for example, are frequently used in conclu-
sions, as in the commencement address by U2 lead singer Bono:
Remember what John Adams said about Ben Franklin: “He does not hes-
itate at our boldest measures but rather seems to think us too irresolute.”
Well, this is the time for bold measures. This is the country, and you
are the generation.7
References to the Introduction
In our discussion of closure, we mentioned referring to the introduction as a way
to end a speech. Finishing a story, answering a rhetorical question, or reminding
the audience of the startling fact or statistic you presented in the introduction
are excellent ways to provide closure. Like bookends on either side of a group of
books on your desk, a related introduction and conclusion provide unified sup-
port for the ideas in the middle.
11.2
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 231 11/17/14 12:18 PM
232 Concluding Your Speech
11.2
In Chapter 10, you read the extended illustration Matt used to open his
speech on the dangers associated with BPA. He concluded the speech by refer-
ring to that introduction:
What would Algeta have said to me if I were to tell her that her healthy
lifestyle would be the same reason that she would die one day? Well,
she was my grandmother. I knew her very well, and she was completely
stubborn, so she would have called me crazy . . . but today I’m going to
let you decide what her answer should have been.8
Matt’s conclusion alludes to his introduction to make his speech memorable, to
motivate his audience to respond, and to provide closure.
Inspirational Appeals or Challenges
Another way to end your speech is to issue an inspirational appeal or chal-
lenge to your listeners, rousing them to an emotional pitch at the conclusion of
the speech. The conclusion becomes the climax. Speechwriter and communica-
tion consultant James W. Robinson explains why such conclusions can work
well:
It’s almost as if, for a few brief moments [the audience] escape from the
stressful demands of our high-pressure world and welcome your gifts:
insightful vision, persuasive rhetoric, a touch of philosophy, a little
emotion, and yes, even a hint of corniness.9
One famous example of a concluding inspirational appeal comes from
Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Dream” speech, for which you can read the entire tran-
script in Appendix B. That King’s conclusion was both inspiring and memorable
has been affirmed by the growing fame of his closing passage through the years
since he delivered the speech.
In his 2013 commencement speech to the graduates of Elon University,
which included his son Doug, NBC anchor Brian Williams talked about his
recent visit to tornado-devastated Moore, Oklahoma. Williams told the gradu-
ates that he had met there with a father whose 9-year-old son had been killed
by the tornado. As he concluded his speech, Williams noted that the Oklahoma
father would give anything he had simply to be able to toss a baseball back
and forth with his lost son. Williams then produced a baseball from under-
neath his ceremonial robes and tossed it to his own son, proposing that the two
have a game of catch when they returned home after the ceremony. Conscious
of his entire audience, Williams ended the speech after this powerful symbolic
gesture by affirming to listeners that tragedies, as well as joyful events such as
graduations, can serve as reminders to us all to be mindful of the importance
of how and with whom we choose to spend our time.10
Both King’s and Williams’s inspiring conclusions reemphasized their cen-
tral ideas in a memorable way, provided closure to their speeches, and inspired
their listeners.
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 232 11/11/14 4:59 PM
233
Effective Conclusions 11.2
Quick Check
Effective Conclusions
•	 Use any of the methods suggested for an effective introduction.
•	 Refer to the introduction of your speech.
•	 Issue an inspirational appeal or a challenge.
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 233 11/11/14 4:59 PM
234 Chapter 11 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
11.1	 Explain the functions of a speech conclusion.
Your speech’s conclusion leaves the final impression of you in your listeners’
minds. The two main purposes of the conclusion are to summarize your speech
and to provide closure. Your summary should rephrase your central idea in a
way that your audience will remember, and it should repeat your main ideas
to fix them in the minds of your listeners. Verbal and nonverbal cues that the
speech is ending will help to provide your audience with closure. You can also
use the conclusion as an opportunity to suggest an action to your audience to
motivate listeners to respond in some way to your message.
Key Term
Closure
11.2	 List and discuss methods for concluding a speech.
Conclusions may take any one of the forms used for introductions. In addition,
you can refer to the introduction or make inspirational appeals or challenges.
Think about This Question
Knowing that you have recently visited the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, your
American history professor asks you to make a brief presentation to the class
about the Wall: its history; its symbolic meaning; and its impact on the families,
comrades, and friends of those memorialized there. Write both an introduction
and a conclusion for this speech.
M11_BEEB3981_05_SE_C11_227-234.indd 234 11/11/14 4:59 PM
235
Chapter 12
Using Words Well:
Speaker Language
and Style
“A speech is
poetry; cadence,
rhythm, imagery,
sweep! A speech
reminds us that
words, like chil­
dren, have the
power to make
dance the dull­
est beanbag of a
heart.”
—Peggy Noonan
	12.1	Differentiating Oral and Written
Language Styles
	12.2	Using Words Effectively
Use Specific, Concrete Words
Use Simple Words
Use Words Correctly
Use Words Concisely
	12.3	Adapting Your Language Style to
Diverse Listeners
Use Language That Your Audience
Can Understand
Use Respectful Language
Use Unbiased Language
Outline
(continued)
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 235 11/17/14 12:21 PM
236 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12
Learning Objectives
	12.1	Describe three differences between oral and written language styles.
	12.2	List and explain three ways to use words effectively.
	12.3	Discuss how to adapt your language style to diverse listeners.
	12.4	List and explain three types of memorable word structures.
In Figure 12.1 are photos of protest signs that were never intended to be funny.1
They illustrate that using language accurately, clearly, and effectively can be a
challenge, even to those engaging in the impassioned exercise of free speech.
	12.4	Crafting Memorable Word Structures
Creating Figurative Images
Creating Drama
Creating Cadence
Analyzing an Example of
Memorable Word Structure
Using Memorable Word Structures
Effectively
Figure 12.1 Sometimes our word choices are unintentionally amusing.
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 236 11/17/14 12:21 PM
237
Differentiating Oral and Written Language Styles 12.1
For public speakers, like protestors, it is important to communicate mes­
sages both clearly and accurately. At the same time, it is also important to pre­
sent those messages in such a way that your audience will listen to, remember,
and perhaps act on what you have to say.
In this chapter, we will focus on the power of language. We will suggest
ways to communicate your messages to other people accurately and effectively.
We will also discuss how the choice of words and word structures can help give
your message a distinctive style.
Differentiating Oral and Written
Language Styles
12.1	 Describe three differences between oral and written language styles.
Your instructor has probably told you not to write your speech out word for
word. The professor has said this because there are least three major differences
between oral and written language styles.
•	 Oral style is more personal than written style. When speaking, you can look
your listeners in the eye and talk to them directly. That personal contact
affects your speech and your verbal style. As a speaker, you are likely to use
more pronouns (I, you) than you would in writing. You are also more likely
to address specific audience members by name.
•	 Oral style is less formal than written style. Memorized speeches usually sound
as if they were written because the words and phrases are longer, more com­
plex, and more formal than those used by most speakers. Oral style, on the
other hand, is characterized by “looser construction, repetition, rephrasing,
and comment clauses (‘you know’) . . .”2
However, there are great variations within both oral and written styles.
One speech may be quite personal and informal, whereas another may have
characteristics more often associated with written style. The personality of
the speaker or writer, the subject of the discourse, the audience, and the
occasion all affect the style of the language that is used.
•	 Oral style is more repetitive than written style. When you don’t understand
something that you are reading in a book or an article, you can stop and
reread a passage, look up unfamiliar words in the dictionary, or ask someone
for help. When you’re listening to a speech, those opportunities usually aren’t
available. For this reason, an oral style is and should be more repetitive.
When you study how to organize a speech, you learn to preview main
ideas in your introduction, develop your ideas in the body of the speech,
and summarize these same ideas in the conclusion. You build in repetition to
make sure that your listeners will grasp your message. Even during the proc­
ess of developing an idea, it is sometimes necessary to state it first, restate it
in a different way, provide an example, and, finally, summarize it.
12.1
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 237 11/17/14 12:21 PM
238 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.2
Using Words Effectively
12.2	 List and explain three ways to use words effectively.
Although your speech will be more personal, less formal, and more repetitive
than would a paper you might write on the same topic, you will still want to
ensure that your message is clear, accurate, and memorable. Your spoken words
should be specific, concrete, simple, and correct.
Use Specific, Concrete Words
If you were to describe your pet snake to an audience, you would need to do
more than say it is a serpent. Instead, you would want to use the most specific
term possible, describing your snake as a ball python or, if you were speaking
to an audience of scientists, perhaps as a Python regius. A specific word or term
such as ball python refers to individual members of a class of more general things,
such as serpent or snake.
Specific words are often concrete words, which appeal to one of our five
senses, whereas general words are often abstract words, which refer to ideas or
qualities. A linguistic theory known as general semantics holds that the more
concrete your words, the clearer your communication. Semanticists use a ladder
of abstraction, like the example shown in Figure 12.2, to model how something
can be described in either concrete or abstract language.
Specific, concrete nouns create memorable images, as in this speech deliv­
ered by a Wake Forest University student:
Sometimes when I sleep, I can still hear the voices of my life—night
crickets, lions’ mating calls, my father’s advice, my friend’s laughter; I
can still hear the voices of Africa.3
12.2
Quick Check
Oral versus Written Style
Written style	 •	 Less personal, having no immediate interaction between
writer and reader
•	 More formal
•	 Less repetitive
Oral style	
•	 More personal, facilitating interaction between speaker and
audience
•	 Less formal
•	 More repetitive
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 238 11/17/14 12:21 PM
239
Using Words Effectively 12.2
Specific, concrete verbs can be especially effective. The late Representative
Barbara Jordan of Texas, whose language skills one speechwriter describes as
“legendary,” recognized the power of concrete verbs.4 For example, the first
draft of a passage in her 1992 Democratic National Convention keynote address
stated:
The American dream is not dead. It is injured, it is sick, but it is not dead.
Jordan revised the line to read:
The American dream is not dead. It is gasping for breath, but it is not
dead.
The concrete verb phrase “gasping for breath” brings alive the image Jordan in­
tended to create.
If you consult a thesaurus when searching for a specific, concrete word, do
not feel that you have to choose the most obscure or unusual term to vary your
description.
Figure 12.2  In this ladder of abstraction, the words at the top of the ladder
are more abstract. Words become more concrete as you move down the
ladder.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
Abstract
Pit Bull
Dog
Mammal
Animal
Concrete
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 239 11/17/14 12:21 PM
240 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.2
Use Simple Words
The best language is often the simplest. Your words should be immediately
understandable to your listeners. Don’t try to impress them with jargon and
pompous language. Instead, as linguist Paul Roberts advises,
Decide what you want to say and say it as vigorously as possible . . . and
in plain words.5
In his classic essay “Politics and the English Language,” George Orwell lists
rules for clear writing, including this prescription for simplicity:
Never use a long word where a short one will do. If it is possible to cut a
word out, always cut it out. Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word,
or a jargon word if you can think of an everyday English equivalent.6
Make audio or video recordings of your practice sessions. As you review the
recording, listen for chances to express yourself with simpler and fewer words.
Used wisely, simple words evoke vivid images for your listeners and communi­
cate with great power and precision.
Use Words Correctly
I was listening to the car radio one day when a woman reading the
news referred to someone as a suede-o-intellectual. I pondered through
three traffic lights until I realized she wasn’t talking about shoes, but a
pseudointellectual.7
A public speech is not the place to demonstrate your lack of familiarity with
English vocabulary and grammar. In fact, your effectiveness with your audience
depends in part on your ability to use the English language correctly. If you
are unsure of the way to apply a grammatical rule, seek assistance from a
good English usage handbook. If you are unsure of a word’s pronunciation or
meaning, use a dictionary. Major online dictionaries provide recordings of the
correct pronunciation of words.
Language operates on two levels, and perhaps the greatest challenge to
using words correctly is remaining aware of connotations as well as denotations.
Denotation The denotation of a word is its literal meaning, the definition
that you find in a dictionary. For example, the denotation of the word notorious
is “famous.”
Connotation The connotation of a word is not usually found in a diction­
ary but it consists of the meaning we associate with the word, based on our
experiences. Notorious connotes fame resulting from some dire deed. Notorious
and famous are not really interchangeable. It is just as important to consider the
connotations of the words you use as it is to consider the denotations.
Sometimes connotations are personal. For example, the word table is defined
denotatively as a piece of furniture consisting of a smooth, flat slab affixed on
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 240 11/17/14 12:21 PM
241
Using Words Effectively 12.2
legs. But when you think of the word table, you might think of the old oak table
your grandparents used to have; table may evoke for you an image of playing
checkers with your grandmother. This is a personal connotation of the word, a
unique meaning based on your own past experiences. Personal meanings are
difficult to predict, but as a public speaker, you should be aware of the possibil­
ity of triggering audience members’ private connotations. This awareness is par­
ticularly important when you are discussing highly emotional or controversial
topics.
And, finally, if your audience includes people whose first language is not
English, to whom the nuances of connotation might not be readily apparent, it
may be necessary to explain your intentions in more detail rather than relying
on word associations.
Use Words Concisely
Concise does not necessarily mean “short”; rather it means “succinct” or “to
the point.” Research suggests that people who use fewer words are perceived
by listeners as more powerful or credible, a perception that may be especially
helpful to persuasive speakers.8 In other words, your goal should be to use only
as many words as are necessary to convey your message. Consider the following
suggestions for using language concisely.
Eliminate Words and Phrases that add no Meaning to Your
message  Concise language helps your audience follow your organization
and can enhance your credibility. Here are phrases you could always eliminate
from your speech:
“In my opinion” (just state the opinion)
“And all that” (meaningless)
“When all is said and done” (just say it)
“As a matter of fact” (just state the fact)
“Before I begin, I’d like to say” (you’ve already begun—just say it)
Phrases such as these are known as clichés. A cliché is an overused expres­
sion that has become meaningless and perhaps even irritating; using a cliché can
make listeners “start tuning out and completely miss the message.”9 One recent
list of annoying clichés includes “at the end of the day,” “user-friendly,” “with
all due respect,” and “Your call is important to us.”10 Substitute specific, concrete
words for clichés.
Avoid Narrating Your Speaking Technique  There’s no need to say,
“Here’s an interesting story that I think you will like.” Just tell the story. Instead
of saying, “I’d like to now offer several facts about this matter,” just state the
facts. Yes, it’s useful to provide signposts and internal summaries throughout
your message—redundancy is needed in oral messages—but be careful of pro­
viding cluttering narration about the techniques you’re using.
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 241 11/17/14 12:21 PM
242 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.3
Avoid a Long Phrase When a Short One Will Do
Instead of saying . . .
So, for that reason
But at the same time
In today’s society
Due to the fact that
In the course of
In the final analysis
Say . . .
So
But
Today
Because
During
Finally
Adapting Your Language Style to
Diverse Listeners
12.3	 Discuss how to adapt your language style to diverse listeners.
To communicate successfully with a diverse group of listeners who comprise
your audience, make sure your language is understandable, appropriate, and
unbiased.
Use Language That Your Audience Can Understand
Even if you and all your public-speaking classmates speak English, you prob­
ably speak many varieties of the language. Perhaps some of your classmates
speak in an ethnic vernacular, such as “Spanglish,” an informal combination of
English and Spanish that is often heard near the United States–Mexico border;
Cajun, with its base of French words, frequently spoken in Louisiana; or the
African American Vernacular English (AAVE). Some of you may reflect where
you grew up by your use of regionalisms, words or phrases that are specific to
one part of the country but rarely used in quite the same way in other places.
Others of you may frequently use jargon, the specialized language of your pro­
fession or hobby.
When you give a speech to those who share your ethnic, regional, or profes­
sional background, you can communicate successfully with them using these
specialized varieties of English. However, when you give a speech to an audi­
ence as diverse as the members of your public-speaking class, where do you find
a linguistic common ground?
The answer is to use Standard American English. Standard American English
(SAE) is the language taught by schools and used in the media, business, and
government in the United States. “Standard” does not imply that Standard
American English is inherently right and all other forms are wrong, only that
it conforms to a standard that most speakers of U.S. English will readily under­
stand, even though they may represent a variety of ethnic, regional, and profes­
sional backgrounds.
12.3
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 242 11/17/14 12:21 PM
243
Adapting Your Language Style to Diverse Listeners 12.3
Use Respectful Language
Shortly after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, U.S. Vice President Dick
Cheney made remarks in which he referred to Pakistanis as “Paks.” Although
he was speaking admiringly of the Pakistani people, he was chided for his
use of the term. The variation Paki is considered a slur, and Pak is only slightly
less offensive. Columnist William Safire remarked, “Cheney probably picked up
Paks in his Pentagon days, but innocent intent is an excuse only once; now he is
sensitized, as are we all.”11
A speaker whose language defames any subgroup—people of particular
ethnic, racial, and religious backgrounds or sexual orientations; women; or
people with disabilities—or whose language might be otherwise considered
offensive or risqué is not only speaking unethically but also running a great risk
of antagonizing audience members. In fact, one study suggests that derogatory
language used to describe people with disabilities adversely affects an audi­
ence’s perceptions of the speaker’s persuasiveness, competence, trustworthi­
ness, and sociability.12
Use Unbiased Language
Even speakers who would never dream of using overtly offensive language may
find it difficult to avoid language that more subtly stereotypes or discriminates.
Sexist language falls largely into this second category. The How To box tells you
how you can avoid some common sources of subtly sexist language.
It is not always easy to avoid biased language. Even with good intentions
and deliberate forethought, you can find yourself at times caught in a double
Avoid Sexist Language
•	 Update outdated uses of masculine pronouns to refer to people of unspecified gender. 
Avoid sentences such as “Everyone should bring his book to class tomorrow.” Instead,
mention two genders (“Everyone should bring his or her book to class tomorrow”), or use a
gender-neutral plural pronoun (“All students should bring their books to class tomorrow”).
•	 Monitor your use of nouns.  Instead of masculine terms such as waiter, chairman, fireman,
and Congressman, choose such gender-neutral alternatives as server, chair, firefighter, and
member of Congress.
•	 Use parallel forms.  It is patronizing to mention the title of only one member of a group or cou-
ple, as in the sentence “President Barack Obama and Michelle have two daughters.” To treat
people equally, you can use the titles of both people: “President and Mrs. Obama have two
daughters.” You may also be able to use neither title: “Barack and Michelle Obama have two
daughters.”
•	 Do not perpetuate stereotypes.  Saying, for example, “The male nurse took good care of his
patients” implies that nursing is a typically female profession. You can clarify the sex of the
nurse without the stereotype by simply saying, “The nurse took good care of his patients.”
How
To
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 243 11/17/14 12:21 PM
244 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.4
bind. For example, suppose that Dr. Pierce is a young, black, female M.D. If you
don’t mention her age, race, and gender when you refer to her, you may rein­
force your listeners’ stereotypical image of a physician as middle-aged, white,
and male. But if you do mention these factors, you might be suspected of imply­
ing that Dr. Pierce’s achievement is unusual. There is no easy answer to this
dilemma or others like it. You will have to consider your audience, your pur­
pose, and the occasion in deciding how best to identify Dr. Pierce.
As women and members of racial, ethnic, and other minorities have become
increasingly visible in such professions as medicine, law, engineering, and pol­
itics, the public has grown to expect unbiased, inclusive language from news
commentators, teachers, textbooks, and magazines–and from public speakers.
Language that does not reflect these changes will disrupt your ability to commu­
nicate your message to your audience, which may well include members of the
minority group to which you are referring.
Quick Check
Adapting Your Language Style to Diverse Listeners
To communicate successfully with diverse listeners, use language your audience
can understand.
To avoid offending your audience, use appropriate language.
To communicate sensitivity to diverse subgroups, use unbiased language.
Crafting Memorable Word Structures
12.4	 List and explain three types of memorable word structures.
The president of the United States makes an important 30-minute speech in your
hometown. From that 30-minute speech, the major news outlets all excerpt the
same ten-second portion. Why? What makes certain parts of a speech quotable
or memorable? Former presidential speechwriter Peggy Noonan has said:
Great speeches have always had great sound bites. . . . They sum up a
point, or make a point in language that is pithy or profound.13
In other words, memorable speeches are stylistically distinctive. They create
arresting images. And they have what a marketing-communication specialist has
termed “ear appeal”:
“Ear appeal” phrases can be like the haunting songs of a musical that the
members of the audience find themselves humming on the way home.
Even if people want to forget them, they can’t.14
12.4
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 244 11/17/14 12:21 PM
245
Crafting Memorable Word Structures 12.4
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the importance of using words that are con­
crete, unbiased, vivid, simple, and correct. In this section, we turn our attention
to groups of words—phrases and sentences—that create drama, figurative images,
and cadences. The memorable word structures summarized here can help you
craft a speech that has both “eye and ear appeal.”15
Creating Figurative Images
One way to make your message memorable is to use figures of speech to create
arresting images. A figure of speech deviates from the ordinary, expected mean­
ings of words to make a description or comparison unique, vivid, and memorable.
Common figures of speech include metaphors, similes, and personification.
Metaphors and Similes A metaphor is an implied comparison of two
things or concepts that are similar in some vital way. Writer and actor Erik
Stolhanske used his own prosthetic leg as a metaphor for any mental or physical
obstacles his audience members might face:
. . . everyone has a “wooden leg” of some kind. I’m living proof that once
you realize your “wooden leg,” whatever it may be, is really just in your
head, that’s when you can stay true to yourself, pursue your dreams
with foolish perseverance, and truly achieve success in life—whatever
that may mean to you.16
Whereas a metaphor is an implied comparison, a simile is a more direct
comparison that includes the word like or as. United Parcel Service CEO Scott
Davis advised an audience to ignore “naysayers,” whose negative message he
compared to that of the main character in “Chicken Little”:
[Naysayers] scurry around like the Henny Pennys of the world, loudly
proclaiming to anyone who will listen: “The sky is falling!” “Don’t do
it!” “It can’t be done!”17
Speakers often turn to metaphor and simile in times that are especially
momentous or overwhelming—times when, as one speaker has said, “the ordi­
nary diction of our lives finds itself unequal to the challenge.”18 In the hours
and days after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States,
various speakers used such metaphorical phrases as “one more circle of Dante’s
hell,” “nuclear winter,” and “the crater of a volcano” to describe the site of the
destroyed World Trade Center in New York.19 Such language is often catego­
rized as crisis rhetoric.
Personification  Personification is the attribution of human qualities to
inanimate things or ideas. Franklin Roosevelt personified nature as a generous
living provider in this line from his first inaugural address:
Nature still offers her bounty and human efforts have multiplied it.
Plenty is at our doorstep.20
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 245 11/17/14 12:21 PM
246 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.4
Creating Drama
Another way to make phrases and sentences memorable is to use the potential
of such structures to create drama in your speech—to keep the audience members
in suspense or to catch them slightly off guard by saying something in a way
that differs from the way they expected you to say it.
Short Sentences  We have already talked about the value of using
short, simple words. Short, simple sentences can have much the same power.
Columnist George F. Will pointed out that the most eloquent sentence in
Lincoln’s memorable second inaugural address is just four words long:21
“And the war came.”
Other strategies for achieving drama in your speech include three stylistic
devices: omission, inversion, and suspension.
Omission  Leaving out a word or phrase that the audience expects to hear is
called omission. When telegrams were a more common means of communica­
tion, senders tried to use as few words as possible because they were charged by
the word, and the more they could leave out, the cheaper the telegram was.
To use omission effectively, the words you leave out must be understood
by your listeners or readers. For example, a captain of a World War II Navy
destroyer used omission to inform headquarters of his successful efforts at finding
and destroying an enemy submarine. Because his audience already understood
which vessel he was chasing, the captain was able to spare all details when he
cabled back to headquarters:
“Sighted sub—sank same.”
Using as few words as possible, he communicated his message in a memorable
way.
About 2,000 years earlier, another military commander informed his supe­
riors in Rome of his conquest of Gaul with the economical message:
“I came, I saw, I conquered.”
That commander was Julius Caesar.
Quick Check
Word Structures with Figurative Imagery
Metaphor	 Makes an implied comparison of two similar things or concepts
Simile	 Compares directly by using the word like or as
Personification	 Attributes human qualities to inanimate things or ideas
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 246 11/17/14 12:21 PM
247
Crafting Memorable Word Structures 12.4
Inversion  Reversing the normal word order of a phrase or sentence is called
inversion. John F. Kennedy used inversion by changing the usual subject–verb–
object sentence pattern to object–subject–verb in this brief declaration from his
inaugural speech:
This much we pledge. . . .22
And at a prayer vigil for those killed in the 2012 school shooting in Newtown,
Connecticut, Barack Obama inverted the word order of his pledge to the griev­
ing families and community:
. . . whatever measure of comfort we can provide, we will provide.23
Suspension  Placing a key word or phrase at the end of a sentence rather
than at the beginning is known as suspension. When you read a mystery novel,
you are held in suspense until you reach the end and learn “who done it.” The
stylistic technique of verbal suspension does something similar. Like inversion,
suspension changes the expected word order or sentence pattern, in this case to
give a key word or phrase the emphasis afforded by placement at the end of a
sentence.
Advertisers use the technique of suspension frequently. For example, the
Coca-Cola Company used suspension as the cornerstone of its worldwide
advertising campaign. Rather than saying “Coke goes better with everything,”
the copywriter decided to stylize the message by making Coke the last word
in the sentence. The slogan became “Things go better with Coke.” The stylized
version was more memorable because it used language in an unexpected way.
Quick Check
Word Structures with Drama
Short sentence	 Emphasizes an important idea
Omission	
Boils an idea down to its essence by leaving out understood
words
Inversion	 Reverses the expected order of words and phrases
Suspension	 Places a key word at the end of a phrase or sentence
Creating Cadence
British Prime Minister and gifted orator Winston Churchill used a “psalm form”
for his speech manuscripts, typing them so that they looked like blank verse
poetry on his page.24 The cadence, or rhythm, of his speeches was evident from
their appearance.
Like Churchill, you can create cadence by using such stylistic devices as rep­
etition, parallelism, antithesis, and alliteration.
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 247 11/17/14 12:21 PM
248 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.4
Repetition  Using a key word or phrase more than once gives rhythm and
power to your message and makes it memorable. Perhaps the best-known modern
example of repetition in a speech is Martin Luther King Jr.’s ringing declaration
of the words that became the title of his famous August 28, 1963, speech at the
Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.
Parallelism Whereas repetition refers to using identical words, parallelism
refers to using different words but the identical grammatical patterns. In a 2013
speech to Israeli students in Jerusalem, Barack Obama used parallelism to empha­
size similarities between Americans and Israelis:
We are enriched by faith. We are governed not simply by men and
women, but by laws. We are fueled by entrepreneurship and innovation.
And we are defined by a democratic discourse . . .25
The four sentences that begin “We are enriched,” “We are governed,” “We are
fueled,” and “we are defined” follow the parallel grammatical pattern of pronoun
(we) + verb phrase.
Antithesis  The word antithesis means “opposition.” In language style, a
sentence that uses antithesis has two parts with parallel structures but contrasting
meanings. Speakers have long recognized the dramatic potential of antithesis.
In his first inaugural address, Franklin Roosevelt declared,
Our true destiny is not to be ministered unto but to minister to ourselves
and to our fellow men.26
When William Faulkner accepted the Nobel Prize for literature in 1950, he spoke
the following now famous antithetical phrase:
I believe that man will not merely endure: he will prevail.27
And when journalist David Brooks addressed the 2013 graduating class of
Sewanee: The University of the South, he advised,
Don’t think about what you want from life, think about what life wants
from you.28
An antithetical statement is a good way to end a speech. The cadence that it
creates will make the statement memorable.
Alliteration  The repetition of a consonant sound (usually an initial conso­
nant) several times in a phrase, clause, or sentence is called alliteration. Allitera­
tion adds cadence to a thought. Consider these examples:
Alliterative Phrase
discipline and direction
virility, valour, virtue
Seneca Falls, and Selma,
  and Stonewall
Speaker
Franklin Roosevelt
Winston Churchill
Barack Obama
Occasion
First inaugural address29
Speech to U.S. and civic
  Congress30
Second inaugural address31
Used sparingly, alliteration can add cadence to your rhetoric.
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 248 11/17/14 12:21 PM
249
Crafting Memorable Word Structures 12.4
Quick Check
Word Structures with Cadence
Repetition 	 Repeats a key word or phrase several times for emphasis
Parallelism 	
Uses the same grammatical pattern in several sentences or phrases
Antithesis 	
Uses parallel structures but opposing meanings in two parts of a
sentence
Alliteration 	
Uses the same consonant sound several times in a phrase, clause,
or sentence
Analyzing an Example of Memorable Word
Structure
We would like to illustrate all seven techniques for creating drama and cadence
with one final example.32 If you ask almost anyone for the most quoted line from
John F. Kennedy’s speeches, that line would probably be this one from his inau­
gural address:
“Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for
your country.”33
Besides expressing a noble thought, this line is so quotable because it uses so
many stylistic techniques, including, as shown in Table 12.1, some of the tech­
niques discussed earlier in this chapter.
Although the passage that we have analyzed does not include any figura­
tive images, the speech from which it comes does have some memorable figura­
tive language, most notably metaphors such as “chains of poverty,” “beachhead
of cooperation,” and “jungle of suspicion.”
Kennedy used figurative imagery, drama, and cadence to give his inaugural
address “eye and ear appeal” and make it memorable—not just to those who
heard it initially but also to those of us who hear, read, and study it more than
50 years later.
Using Memorable Word Structures Effectively
Having explored ways to add style and interest to the language of your speech,
we must now consider how best to put those techniques into practice.
Use Distinctive Stylistic Devices Sparingly  Although we have
affirmed the value of style, do not overdo it. Including too much highly stylized
language can put the focus on your language rather than on your content.
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 249 11/17/14 12:21 PM
250 Using Words Well: Speaker Language and Style
12.4
Use Stylistic Devices At Specific Points In Your Speech Save
your use of stylistic devices for times during your speech when you want your
audience to remember your key ideas or when you wish to capture their atten­
tion. Some kitchen mixers have a “burst of power” switch to help churn through
difficult mixing chores with extra force. Think of the stylistic devices we have
reviewed as opportunities to provide a burst of power to your ideas. Use them
in your opening sentences, statements of key ideas, and conclusion.
Use Stylistic Devices To Economize  When sentences become too long
or complex, try to recast them with antithesis or suspension. Also consider the
possibility of omission.
Table 12.1  Analyzing a Memorable Word Structure
“Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country.”
(John F. Kennedy)
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
STYLISTIC TECHNIQUE EXAMPLE DISCUSSION
Techniques That Create Rhythm
Omission “Ask not . . .” The subject, you, is not stated.
Inversion “Ask not . . .” In casual everyday conversation,
we would usually say “do not ask”
rather than “ask not.” The inversion
makes the opening powerful and
attention-grabbing.
Suspension “. . . ask what you can do
for your country.”
The key message, “ask what
you can do for your country,”
is suspended, or delayed, until
the end of the sentence. If the
sentence structure had been
reversed, the impact would not
have been as dramatic.
Techniques That Create Drama
Repetition “Ask not what your country
can do for you; ask what
you can do for your
country.”
A form of the word you appears
four times in a sentence of
seventeen words, reflecting
Kennedy’s audience-centeredness.
Parallelism “Ask not what your country
can do for you; ask what
you can do for your
country.”
The two clauses use the same
grammatical pattern (what +
subject + verb phrase +
prepositional phrase).
Antithesis “Ask not . . . ; ask . . .” The two clauses separated by
the semicolon have contrasting
meanings.
Alliteration “Ask . . . can . . . can . . .
country.”
The alliterative k sound is repeated
four times, at more or less even
intervals in the sentence.
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 250 11/17/14 12:21 PM
251
Chapter 12  study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
12.1	 Describe three differences between oral and written language styles.
Oral language style is more personal and less formal than written style. Speakers
must also provide their audiences with more repetition than writers need to use.
12.2	 List and explain three ways to use words effectively.
Effective speakers use specific, concrete words to evoke clear mental images
for their listeners. They also choose simple, respectful, unbiased words. As a
speaker, be sure to use words correctly and to keep in mind the connotations of
words, as well as their dictionary definitions. And, finally, eliminate unnecessary
words and phrases.
Key Terms
Ladder of abstraction
Denotation
Connotation
Concise
Cliché
12.3	 Discuss how to adapt your language style to diverse listeners.
Use language your listeners can understand. Use appropriate language to avoid
offending your audience. Use unbiased language to communicate in a sensitive
way to members of subgroups in your audience.
Key Terms
Ethnic vernacular
Regionalism
Jargon
Standard American English
12.4	 List and explain three types of memorable word structures.
You can create arresting images through such figures of speech as metaphors,
similes, and personification. You can create drama by using short sentences for
important ideas, strategically omitting words, and structuring sentences with
key words at the end to create suspense. Use repetition, alliteration, parallelism,
and antithesis to create memorable rhythm or cadence.
Key Terms
Figure of speech	 Metaphor	 Simile
Crisis rhetoric	 Personification	 Omission
Inversion	 Suspension	Cadence
Repetition	 Parallelism	Antithesis
Alliteration
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 251 11/17/14 12:21 PM
252 Chapter 12  study guide
Think about These Questions
•	 Some colleges and universities offer a hybrid communication course that
provides instruction and practice in both writing and speaking. If enrolled
in such a course and given the assignment to use the same topic, central
idea, main idea, and supporting material to develop both a 750-word paper
and a three- to five-minute speech, how should the paper and the speech
differ?
•	 A friend asks for advice on making the word choice in her speech as effec­
tive as possible. Offer her at least three suggestions, based on this chapter,
for using words effectively.
•	 In recent years, people have become increasingly conscious of the ways in
which our language gives the impression that we are referring only to men
when it is more appropriate to refer to both men and women. Has political
correctness gotten out of hand? Are we becoming too sensitive to gender
issues in our public dialogue? Or are we not sensitive enough? Explain
your answer.
•	 Louis Howe, an aide to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, is now thought to
have written the famous line from Roosevelt’s first inaugural address: “The
only thing we have to fear is fear itself.” Is it ethical to credit Roosevelt with
this line? Why or why not?
M12_BEEB3981_05_SE_C12_235-252.indd 252 11/17/14 12:21 PM
Part 5
Delivering
a Speech
Chapter 13	 Delivering Your Speech
Chapter 14	 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Delivering
a
Speech
Chapters
13-14
5
M13A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB5.indd 65 11/18/14 9:32 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Chapter 13  Delivering Your Speech
1.	 In your own words, describe why the nonverbal elements of speech delivery are
important.
2.	 Which of the physical characteristics described in the chapter—eye contact, gesturing,
movement, posture, or facial expression—are you confident you can use effectively?
Which one(s) are most challenging for you? Which of the tips in this chapter do you plan
to use to help you overcome your challenges?
3.	 Based on emotional contagion theory, described in this chapter, what elements of your
delivery can you adapt if listeners do not seem to be “catching” the emotional message
you want to communicate?
Chapter 14  Designing and Using Presentation Aids
1.	 List in your own words five ways presentation aids can help members of your audience.
2.	 Summarize in your own words this chapter's four guidelines on how to develop effec-
tive presentation aids.
3.	 What is the least effective use of presentation aids you've witnessed? Based on this
chapter, what advice would you give to that speaker to help improve his or her use of
presentation aids?
Delivering
a
Speech
Chapters
13-14
5
M13A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB5.indd 66 11/18/14 9:32 PM
253
Chapter 13
Delivering Your
Speech
“Speak the
speech, I pray
you, as I pro-
nounced it to you,
trippingly on the
tongue.”1
—William
Shakespeare
	13.1	The Power of Speech Delivery
Listeners Expect Effective Delivery
Listeners Make Emotional
Connections with You through
Delivery
Listeners Believe What They See
	13.2	Methods of Delivery
Manuscript Speaking
Memorized Speaking
Impromptu Speaking
Extemporaneous Speaking
Outline
(continued)
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 253 11/13/14 12:22 PM
254 Delivering Your Speech
13
Learning Objectives
	13.1	Identify three reasons delivery is important to a public speaker.
	13.2	Identify and describe four methods of delivery.
	13.3	Identify and illustrate the characteristics of effective delivery.
	13.4	Use strategies for adapting your delivery when speaking to diverse
audiences.
	13.5	Describe the steps to follow when you rehearse your speech.
	13.6	List four suggestions for enhancing the final delivery of your
speech.
	13.7	Explain and use strategies for responding to questions from your
audience at the end of your speech.
Delivery has long been considered an important part of public speaking. But
is the delivery of your speech more important than the content of your mes-
sage? For centuries, since ancient Greece, famous speakers and speech teachers,
such as Aristotle and, later, the Roman rhetorician Quintilian, have argued about
which is more important: what you say or how you say it.2
Today, whether you are speaking in front of a live audience or presenting a
talk via Skype or other online, mediated method, communication teachers be-
lieve that both content and delivery contribute to speaking effectiveness. One
survey suggested that “developing effective delivery” is a primary goal of most
speech teachers.3 Considerable research supports the claim that delivery plays
an important role in influencing how audiences react to a speaker and his or her
message. It is your audience who will determine whether you are successful.
Delivery counts.
	13.3	Characteristics of Effective Delivery
Eye Contact
Gestures
Movement
Posture
Facial Expression
Vocal Delivery
Personal Appearance
	13.4	Audience Diversity and Delivery
	13.5	Rehearsing Your Speech: Some Final
Tips
	13.6	Delivering Your Speech
	13.7	Responding to Questions
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 254 11/13/14 12:22 PM
255
The Power of Speech Delivery 13.1
The Power of Speech Delivery
13.1	 Identify three reasons delivery is important to a public speaker.
The way you hold your notes, your gestures and stance, and your impatient ad-
justment of your glasses all contribute to the overall effect of your speech. One
study confirmed what you may have suspected; when a speaker’s delivery was
effective, the audience felt greater pleasure and had a more positive emotional
response than when the same speaker had poor delivery.4
Nonverbal communication is communication other than through written
or spoken language that creates meaning for someone. Nonverbal factors such
as eye contact, posture, vocal quality, and facial expression play a major role
in the communication process. As much as 65 percent of the social meaning of
messages is based on nonverbal expression.5 Why does your delivery have such
power to affect how your audience will receive your message? One reason is
that listeners expect a good speaker to provide good delivery. Your unspoken
message is also how you express your feelings and emotions to an audience.
Ultimately, audiences believe what they see more than what you say.
Listeners Expect Effective Delivery
In a public-speaking situation, nonverbal elements have an important influence
on the audience’s perceptions about a speaker’s effectiveness. Communication
researcher Judee Burgoon and her colleagues have developed a theory called
nonverbal expectancy theory. The essence of the theory is this: People have
certain expectations as to how you should communicate.6 If you don’t behave
as your listeners think you should, your listeners will feel that you have vio-
lated their expectations. The theory predicts that if a listener expects you to have
effective delivery, and your delivery is poor, you will lose credibility. There is
evidence that although many speakers do not deliver speeches effectively, audi-
ences nevertheless expect a good speech to be well delivered.
Audience-Centered Delivery  As we have emphasized, audience mem-
bers with different cultural backgrounds will hold different assumptions about
how a speech should be presented. More than one hundred years ago, speak-
ers were taught to deliver orations using a more formal style of speaking than
most people prefer today. In newsreels of speakers during the early part of the
twentieth century, their gestures and movement seem stilted and unnatural be-
cause they were taught to use dramatic, planned gestures. If you are speaking to
an audience of a thousand people, using a microphone to reach the back of the
auditorium, your listeners may expect a more formal delivery style. But your
public-speaking class members would probably find it odd if you spoke to them
using a formal oratorical style that resembled the way a politician would have
addressed a political rally in 1910.
13.1
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 255 11/13/14 12:22 PM
256 Delivering Your Speech
13.1
Platform Conversation  For most North American listeners today, ef-
fective delivery has been described as “platform conversation.” It includes hav-
ing good eye contact with your listeners and using appropriate gestures, just
as you do in your interpersonal conversations with your friends. Effective de-
livery also means your voice has a natural, conversational tone, varied inflec-
tion (rather than a droning monotone), and an intensity that communicates that
you’re interested in your message and your listeners.
Listeners Make Emotional Connections with You
through Delivery
Nonverbal behavior is particularly important in communicating feelings, emotions,
attitudes, likes, and dislikes to an audience. One researcher found that we communi-
cate as little as 7 percent of the emotional impact of a message by the words we use.7
About 38 percent hinges on such qualities of voice as inflection, intensity, or loud-
ness, and 55 percent hinges on facial expressions. Generalizing from these findings,
we may say that we communicate approximately 93 percent of emotional mean-
ing nonverbally. Although some scholars question whether these findings can be
applied to all communication settings, the research does suggest that the manner of
delivery provides important information about the speaker’s feelings and emotions.8
Another reason to pay attention to how you communicate emotions when
delivering a speech is that emotions are contagious. Emotional contagion theory
suggests that people tend to “catch” the emotions of others.9 If you want your
listeners to feel a certain emotion, then it’s important for you to express that
emotion yourself. Have you ever noticed that when you watch a movie in a
crowded movie theater where others are laughing, you’re more likely to laugh
too? Producers of TV situation comedies use a laugh track or record the laughter
of a live audience to enhance the emotional reactions of home viewers; these
producers know that emotions are contagious.
Listeners Believe What They See
“I’m very glad to speak with you tonight,” drones the speaker in a monotone,
eyes glued to his notes. His audience probably does not believe him. When our
nonverbal delivery contradicts what we say, people generally believe the non-
verbal message. In this case, the speaker is communicating that he’s not glad to
be talking to this audience.
We usually believe nonverbal messages because they are more difficult to
fake. Although we can monitor certain parts of our nonverbal behavior, it is dif-
ficult to control all of it consciously. Research suggests that a person who is try-
ing to deceive someone may speak with a higher vocal pitch, at a slower rate,
and with more pronunciation mistakes than normal.10 Blushing, sweating, and
changed breathing patterns also often belie our stated meaning. As the saying
goes, “What you do speaks so loudly, I can’t hear what you say.”
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 256 11/13/14 12:22 PM
257
Methods of Delivery 13.2
Methods of Delivery
13.2	 Identify and describe four methods of delivery.
The style of delivery you choose will influence your nonverbal behaviors. There
are four basic methods of delivery from which a speaker can choose: manuscript
speaking, memorized speaking, impromptu speaking, and extemporaneous
speaking. They are summarized in Table 13.1 at the end of this section. Let’s
consider each in some detail.
Manuscript Speaking
You have a speech to present and are afraid that you will forget what you have
prepared to say. So you write your speech and then read it to your audience.
Speech teachers frown on this approach, particularly for public-speaking stu-
dents. Reading is usually a poor way to deliver a speech. Although it may pro-
vide some insurance against forgetting the speech, manuscript speaking is
rarely done well enough to be interesting. You have probably attended a lecture
that was read and wondered, “Why doesn’t he just make a copy of the speech
for everyone in the audience rather than reading it to us?”
Need For Careful Crafting  Despite the drawback of manuscript speak-
ing, however, some speeches should be read. One advantage of reading from
a manuscript is that you can choose words very carefully when dealing with a
sensitive and critical issue. The president of the United States, for example, often
finds it useful to have his remarks carefully scripted.
When possible, during times of crisis, statements to the press by govern-
ment, education, or business leaders should be carefully crafted rather than
tossed off casually. Although there are times when it is impossible to have a
manuscript speech at hand, an inaccurate or misspoken statement could have
serious consequences.
13.2
Quick Check
The Power of Speech Delivery
Nonverbal communication:
•	 creates a majority of the meaning of a speech.
•	 disappoints audiences when it violates their expectations.
•	 communicates almost all the emotion in a speech.
•	 can help listeners “catch” the speaker’s feelings.
•	 is often more believable than words.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 257 11/13/14 12:22 PM
258 Delivering Your Speech
13.2
Delivery Tips  On those occasions when you do need to use a manuscript,
here are several tips to help you deliver your message effectively:11
•	 Indicate in writing on your manuscript where to pause or emphasize certain
words. Use a slash mark (/) or some other symbol to remind you to pause
in strategic places.
•	 Type your speech in short, easy-to-scan phrases on the upper two-thirds of
the paper so that you do not have to look too far down the page.
•	 As with any performance, practice with your manuscript before you speak.
•	 If you’re afraid you’ll lose your place, unobtrusively use your index finger
to keep your place in the manuscript.
•	 Make eye contact; don’t look over listeners’ heads.
•	 Try to take in an entire sentence at a time from your manuscript, so that you
can maintain eye contact with your audience throughout each sentence and
especially at the end of a sentence.
•	 Use your normal, natural speed of delivery; do not read the manuscript too
quickly.
•	 Speak with a natural, varied vocal variation so that you don’t sound as
though you are reading.
•	 Mark the manuscript to help you sound more natural. For example, under-
line or highlight words or phrases you want to emphasize.
•	 Use appropriate natural gestures and movement to add further nonverbal
interest and emphasis to your message.
Memorized Speaking
“All right,” you think, “since reading a speech is hard to pull off, I’ll write my
speech out word for word and then memorize it.” You’re pretty sure that no
one will be able to tell because you won’t be using notes. Memorized speaking
also has the advantage of allowing you to have maximum eye contact with
the audience. But the key differences between speaking and writing are evi-
dent in a memorized speech, just as they can be heard in a manuscript speech.
Most memorized speeches sound stiff, stilted, and overly rehearsed. You also
run the risk of forgetting parts of your speech and awkwardly searching for
words in front of your audience. And you won’t be able to make on-the-spot
adaptations to your listeners if your speech is memorized. For these reasons,
speech teachers do not encourage their students to memorize speeches for
class presentation.
If you are accepting an award, introducing a speaker, making announce-
ments, or delivering other brief remarks, a memorized delivery style is some-
times acceptable. But, as with manuscript speaking, you must take care to make
your presentation sound lively and interesting.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 258 11/13/14 12:22 PM
259
Methods of Delivery 13.2
Impromptu Speaking
You have undoubtedly already delivered many impromptu presentations. Your
response to a question posed by a teacher in class and an unrehearsed rebuttal to
a comment made by a colleague during a meeting are examples of impromptu
presentations. Impromptu speaking is often described as “thinking on your
feet” or “speaking off the cuff.”
The advantage of impromptu speaking is that you can speak informally,
maintaining direct eye contact with the audience. But unless a speaker is ex-
tremely talented or has learned and practiced the techniques of impromptu
speaking, the speech itself will be unimpressive. An impromptu speech usually
lacks logical organization and thorough research.
There are times, of course, when you may be called on to speak without
advance warning or to improvise when something goes awry in your efforts to
deliver your planned message. This was the case when President Bill Clinton
was delivering his first State of the Union address in 1993 and the teleprompter
scrolled the wrong text of his speech for seven minutes. What did he do, as mil-
lions of people watched on television? He kept going. Drawing on his years of
speaking experience, he continued to speak; no one watching knew about the
error until afterward.
If you know you will be giving a speech, prepare and rehearse it. Don’t just
make mental notes or assume that you will find the words when you need them.
It was Mark Twain who said, “Agood impromptu speech takes about three weeks
to prepare.” When you are called on to deliver an improvised or impromptu
speech, the guidelines in the How To box can help to ease you through it.
Extemporaneous Speaking
If you are not reading from a manuscript, reciting from memory, or speaking
impromptu, what’s left? Extemporaneous speaking is the approach that most
communication teachers recommend for most situations. When delivering a
speech extemporaneously, you speak from a written or memorized general out-
line, but you do not have the exact wording in front of you or in memory. You
have rehearsed the speech so that you know key ideas and their organization,
but not to the degree that the speech sounds memorized.
An extemporaneous style is conversational; it gives your audience the
impression that the speech is being created as they listen to it, rather than as
though it was prepared yesterday or weeks ago, and to some extent it is. Seeing
something happening now provides added interest and excitement. The extem-
poraneous method reflects the advantages of a well-organized speech delivered
in an interesting and vivid manner.
Martin Luther King Jr. was an expert in speaking extemporaneously; he
typically did not use a manuscript when he spoke. He had notes, but he often
drew on the energy of his audience as well as his own natural speaking talents
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 259 11/13/14 12:22 PM
260 Delivering Your Speech
13.2
to make his oratory come alive.12 Dr. King told an interviewer that while deliv-
ering his stirring “Dream” speech in 1963, he decided only after he had begun
speaking to add the most famous portion of the speech, based on an idea he
had used many times before.13 He made a good decision to improvise. Accord-
ing to a study by the National Endowment for the Humanities, high school
seniors were more likely to know the source of Dr. King’s famous speech
(97 percent) than that of the Gettysburg Address or the Declaration of Inde-
pendence.14 You can use the same extemporaneous techniques he used to draw
on your audience’s energy and make your speech a living message rather than
a canned presentation.
Give an Impromptu Presentation
•	 Consider your audience.  Just as you have learned to do in other speaking situations, when
you are called on for impromptu remarks, think first of your audience. Who are the members
of your audience? What are their common characteristics and interests? What do they know
about your topic? What do they expect you to say? What is the occasion of your speech? A
quick mental review of these questions will help to ensure that even impromptu remarks are
audience-centered.
•	 Be brief.  When you are asked to deliver an off-the-cuff speech, your audience knows the
circumstances and will not expect or even want a lengthy discourse. One to three minutes is a
realistic time frame for most impromptu situations. Some spur-of-the-moment remarks, such
as press statements, may be even shorter.
•	 Organize!  Even off-the-cuff remarks should not falter or ramble. Effective impromptu speak-
ers organize their ideas into an introduction, a body, and a conclusion. Consider organizing
your points using a simple organizational strategy such as chronological order or a topical pat-
tern. A variation on the chronological pattern is the past, present, future model of addressing
an issue. The speaker organizes the impromptu speech by discussing (1) what has happened
in the past, (2) what is happening now, and (3) what may happen in the future.
•	 Rely on your personal experience and knowledge.  Because there is no opportunity to
conduct any kind of research before delivering an impromptu speech, you will have to speak
from your own experience and knowledge. Remember, audiences almost always respond fa-
vorably to personal illustrations, so use any appropriate and relevant ones that come to mind.
Of course, the more knowledge you have about the subject to be discussed, the easier it will
be to speak about it off the cuff.
•	 Speak honestly.  Do not make up information or provide facts or figures you’re not certain
about. An honest “I don’t know” or a very brief statement is more appropriate.
•	 Be cautious.  No matter how much knowledge you have, if your subject is at all sensitive or
your information is classified, be careful when discussing it during your impromptu speech. If
asked about a controversial topic, give an honest but noncommittal answer. You can always
elaborate later, but you can never take back something rash you have already said. It is better
to be cautious than sorry!
How
To
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 260 11/13/14 12:22 PM
261
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
How do you develop an extemporaneous delivery style? Here are tips for
what to do at three stages in your rehearsal:
•	 Early rehearsal. When you first rehearse your speech, use as many notes as
you need to help you remember your ideas, but each time you rehearse, try
to rely less and less on your notes.
•	 Later rehearsal. When you find yourself starting to use the exact same words
each time you rehearse, you’re memorizing your speech; either stop re-
hearsing or consider other ways of expressing your ideas.
•	 Final rehearsal. Revise your speaking notes so that you need only brief notes
or notes for only lengthy quotations.
Characteristics of Effective Delivery
13.3	 Identify and illustrate the characteristics of effective delivery.
After learning about the four methods of delivery, you now know that for most
speaking situations, you should strive for a conversational style. But you still may
have a number of specific questions about enhancing the effectiveness of your de-
livery. Typical concerns include “What do I do with my hands?” and “Is it all right
to move around while I speak?” “How can I make my voice sound interesting?”
13.3
Table 13.1  Methods of Delivery
Delivery Method Description Disadvantages Advantages
Manuscript speaking Reading your speech from a
prepared text
•	 Your speech is likely to sound
as if it is being read.
•	 It takes considerable skill and
practice to make the mes-
sage sound interesting.
•	 You can craft the message care-
fully, which is especially important
if it is being presented to the
media.
•	 The language can be beautifully
refined, polished, and stylized.
Memorized speaking Giving a speech from
memory without using notes
•	 You may forget parts of your
speech.
•	 You may sound overly
rehearsed and mechanical.
•	 You can have direct eye contact
with the audience.
•	 You can move around freely or use
gestures while speaking, since you
don’t need notes.
Impromptu speaking Delivering a speech without
preparing in advance
•	 It is challenging to organize
your speech well and deliver
it smoothly.
•	 Lack of advance preparation
and research makes it more
difficult to cite evidence and
supporting material for the
message.
•	 You can easily adapt to how your
audience is reacting to you and
your message during the speech.
•	 The audience sees and hears an
authentic speech that is spontane-
ously delivered without notes.
Extemporaneous
speaking
Knowing the major ideas,
which have been outlined,
but not memorizing the exact
wording
•	 It takes time to prepare an
extemporaneous speech.
•	 It takes skill to deliver the
speech well.
•	 Your speech is well organized and
well researched.
•	 Your speech sounds spontaneous
and yet appropriately polished.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 261 11/13/14 12:22 PM
262 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
Although these concerns might seem daunting, being confident about your ability
to present a well-prepared and well-rehearsed speech is the best antidote for jitters
about delivery. Practice and a focus on communicating your message to your au-
dience are vital for effective communication and great for your confidence.
To help answer specific questions about presenting a speech, consider seven
major categories of nonverbal behavior that affect delivery. Specifically, we will
help you improve your eye contact, use appropriate gestures, move meaning-
fully, maintain an appropriate posture, use facial expressions to communicate
emotion, use your voice both to be understood and to maintain interest, and
ensure that your personal appearance is appropriate. The ancient Roman orator
Cicero, author of De Oratore, called these behaviors the “language of the body.”15
Eye Contact
Of all the aspects of delivery discussed in this chapter, the most important one
in a public-speaking situation for North Americans is eye contact. Eye contact
with your audience opens communication, keeps your audience interested, and
makes you more believable. Each of these functions contributes to the success
of your delivery. Eye contact also provides you with feedback about how your
speech is coming across.
Making eye contact with your listeners clearly shows that you are ready to
talk to them. Most people start a conversation by looking at the person they are
going to talk to. The same process occurs in public speaking.
Once you have started talking, continued eye contact lets you gauge how
audience members are responding to your speech. You don’t need to look at
your listeners continuously. As the need arises, you should certainly look at your
notes, but also look at your listeners frequently, just to see what they’re doing.
Most listeners will think that you are capable and trustworthy if you look
them in the eye. Several studies document a relationship between eye contact and
increased speaker credibility.16 Speakers who make eye contact for less than
50 percent of the length of their presentations are considered unfriendly, uninformed,
inexperienced, and even dishonest by their listeners. Eye contact may also make
your speech more effective. Another study showed that those audience members
who had more than 50 percent eye contact with their speaker performed better in
postspeech tests than did those who had less than 50 percent eye contact.17
However, not all people from all cultures prefer the same amount of direct
eye contact when listening to someone talk. In interpersonal contexts, people
from Asian cultures, for example, expect less direct eye contact when communi-
cating with others than do North Americans.
Most audiences in the United States prefer that you establish eye contact
with them even before you begin your speech with your attention-catching in-
troduction. When it’s time to speak, calmly walk to the lectern or to the front of
the audience, pause briefly, and look at your audience before you say anything.
Eye contact nonverbally sends the message “I am interested in you; tune me in; I
have something I want to share with you.”
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 262 11/13/14 12:22 PM
263
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
Read the How To box for more tips for effectively establishing eye contact
with your audience
Gestures
The next time you have a conversation with someone, notice how both of you use
your hands and bodies to communicate. Important points are emphasized with ges-
tures. You also gesture to indicate places, to enumerate items, and to describe ob-
jects. Gestures have the same functions for public speakers. Yet many people who
gesture easily and appropriately in the course of everyday conversations aren’t sure
what to do with their hands when they find themselves in front of an audience.
Adapt Gestures To Audience Members’ Cultural Expectations 
There is evidence that gestures vary from culture to culture. When he was mayor
of New York City during the 1930s and 1940s, Fiorello La Guardia, who was
fluent in Yiddish and Italian as well as in English, would speak the language
that was appropriate for each audience. One researcher studied old newsreels
of the mayor and discovered that with the sound turned off, viewers could still
identify the language the mayor was speaking. How? When speaking English,
he used minimal gestures. When speaking Italian, he used broad, sweeping ges-
tures. And when speaking Yiddish, he used short, choppy hand movements.
Cultural expectations can help you to make decisions about your approach
to using gestures. Listeners from Japan and China, for example, prefer a quieter,
less flamboyant use of gestures. One Web site that offers tips for people con-
ducting business in India suggests, “When you wish to point, use your chin or
your full hand, but never just a single finger, as this gesture is used only with
Use Eye Contact Effectively
•	 Look as you begin speaking.  Have your opening sentence well enough in mind that you can
deliver it without looking at your notes or away from your listeners.
•	 Look right at them.  Don’t look over your listeners’ heads; establish eye-to-eye contact.
•	 Look at everybody.  Establish eye contact with the entire audience, not just with those in the
front row or only one or two people.
•	 Look everywhere.  Look to the back of the audience as well as the front and from one side
of your audience to the other, selecting an individual to focus on briefly and then moving on
to someone else. You need not move your head back and forth rhythmically like a lighthouse
beacon; it’s best not to establish a predictable pattern for your eye contact.
•	 Look at individuals.  Establish person-to-person contact with them—not so long that it will
make a listener feel uncomfortable but long enough to establish the feeling that you are talking
directly to that individual.
•	 Look into the camera.  If your speech is being video recorded and you have no audience
present, then deliver your speech while looking into the camera lens. If there is an audience
present, however, look at your audience rather than only at the camera lens.
How
To
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 263 11/13/14 12:22 PM
264 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
inferiors. The chin is not used to signal to superiors. The best way to point is
with the full hand.”18 When one of the authors spoke in England, several listen-
ers noted the use of “typical overly expressive American gestures and move-
ment.” British listeners seem to prefer that the speaker stay behind a lectern and
use relatively few gestures. Other Europeans agree that they can spot an American
speaker because Americans typically are more animated in their use of gestures,
movement, and facial expressions than are Northern European speakers.
Avoid Awkward Gestures  Public-speaking teachers often observe sev-
eral unusual, inappropriate, and unnatural gestures among their students. We’re
not suggesting that you can never make these gestures, but holding them for a
long time or during an entire speech looks awkward and unnatural and may dis-
tract your audience. They also keep you from using other, more helpful gestures.
•	 Parade rest. Some speakers keep their hands behind their backs like soldiers
given a “parade rest” command.
•	 Broken wing. Another common position is standing with one hand on the hip
or, even worse, both hands resting on the hips in a “double broken wing.”
•	 Flesh wound. Few poses are more awkward-looking than when a speaker
clutches one arm as if grazed by a bullet. The audience half expects the
speaker to call out reassuringly, “Don’t worry, Ma, it’s only a flesh wound.”
•	 Hands in pockets. Keeping your hands in your pockets can make you look as
if you were afraid to let go of your change or your keys.
•	 Fig leaf. Some students clasp their hands and let them drop in front of them
in a distracting “fig leaf clutch.”
Gestures can distract your audience in various other ways as well. Grasping
the lectern until your knuckles turn white or just letting your hands flop around
without purpose or control does little to help you communicate your message.
USE FUNCTIONAL Gestures  If you don’t know what to do with your hands,
think about the message you want to communicate. As in ordinary conversation,
your hands should simply help to emphasize or reinforce your verbal message.
Specifically, your gestures can lend strength to or detract from what you have
to say by (1) repeating, (2) contradicting, (3) substituting, (4) complementing,
(5) emphasizing, and (6) regulating.
•	 Repeating. Gestures can help you repeat your verbal message. For example,
you can say, “I have three major points to talk about today” while holding
up three fingers. Or you can describe an object as being 12 inches long while
holding your hands about a foot apart. Repeating what you say through
nonverbal means can reinforce your message.
•	 Contradicting. Because your audience will believe what you communicate
nonverbally sooner than what you communicate verbally, monitor your ges-
tures to make sure that you are not contradicting what you say. It is difficult
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 264 11/13/14 12:22 PM
265
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
to convey an image of control and confidence while using flailing gestures
and awkward poses.
•	 Substituting. Not only can your behavior reinforce or contradict what you
say, but your gestures can also substitute for your message. Without utter-
ing a word, you can hold up the palm of your hand to calm a noisy crowd.
Flashing two fingers to form a V for “victory” and raising a clenched fist
are other common examples of how gestures can substitute for a verbal
message.
•	 Complementing. Gestures can also add meaning to your verbal message. A
politician who declines to comment on a reporter’s question while holding
up her hands to augment her verbal refusal is relying on the gesture to com-
plement or provide further meaning to her verbal message.
•	 Emphasizing. You can give emphasis to what you say by using an appropri-
ate gesture. A shaking fist or a slicing gesture with one or both hands helps
to emphasize a message. So does pounding your fist into the palm of your
hand. Other gestures can be less dramatic but still lend emphasis to what
you say. Try to allow your gestures to arise from the content of your speech
and your emotions.
•	 Regulating. Gestures can also regulate the exchange between you and your
audience. If you want the audience to respond to a question, you can ex-
tend both palms to invite a response. During a question-and-answer ses-
sion, your gestures can signal when you want to talk and when you want to
invite others to do so.
Use Gestures Effectively  One hundred years ago, elocutionists taught
their students how to gesture to communicate specific emotions or messages.
Today teachers of speech have a different approach. Rather than prescribing
gestures for specific situations, they feel it is more useful to offer suitable crite-
ria (standards) by which to judge effective gestures, regardless of what is being
said. We present these guidelines in the How To box.
You also need to keep one important principle in mind: Use gestures that
work best for you. Don’t try to be someone you are not. President Barack
Obama’s style may work for him, but you are not Barack Obama. Your gestures
should fit your personality. It may be better to use no gestures—to just put your
hands comfortably at your side–than to use awkward, distracting gestures or to
try to counterfeit someone else’s gestures. Your nonverbal delivery should flow
from your message.
Movement
Should you walk around during your speech, or should you stay in one place?
If there is a lectern, should you stand behind it, or would it be acceptable to
stand in front of it or to the side? Is it all right to sit down while you speak? Can
you move among the audience, as several popular daytime hosts like to do? You
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 265 11/13/14 12:22 PM
266 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
may well find yourself pondering one or more of these questions while prepar-
ing for your speeches. The following discussion can help you to answer them.
Move Purposefully  Your movement should be consistent with the ­
verbal
content of your message. It should make sense rather than appearing to be
­
aimless wandering. Take care that your movement does not detract from your
message. If the audience focuses on your movement rather than on what you are
saying, it would be better to stand still. An absence of movement is better than
distracting movement.
Avoid Physical Barriers  Robert Frost said, “Good fences make good
neighbors.” Professional speech coach Brent Filson says, “For my money, good
fences make lousy speeches.”19 He recommends, as do we, that you eliminate
physical barriers between you and the audience. For more formal occasions, you
will be expected to stand behind a lectern to deliver your message. But even on
Gesture Effectively
•	 Stay natural.  Gestures should be relaxed, not tense or rigid. Your gestures should flow with
your message. Rehearsed gestures that do not arise naturally from what you are trying to say
are likely to appear awkward and stilted.
•	 Be definite.  Gestures should appear definite rather than as accidental brief jerks of your
hands or arms. If you want to gesture, go ahead and gesture. Avoid minor hand movements
that will be masked by the lectern.
•	 Make your gestures consistent with your message.  If you are excited, gesture more
vigorously. Gestures can be used for a variety of purposes, such as enumerating, pointing, de-
scribing, and symbolizing an idea or concept (such as clasping your hands together to suggest
agreement or coming together).
•	 Vary your gestures.  Try not to use just one hand or one all-purpose gesture.
•	 Don’t overdo it.  Gestures should be unobtrusive; your audience should focus not on the beauty
or appropriateness of your gestures but on your message. Avoid sawing or slashing through the
air with your hands unless you are trying to emphasize a particularly dramatic point.
•	 Coordinate gestures with what you say.  Gestures should be well timed to coincide with
your verbal message. When you announce that you have three major points, your gesture of
enumeration should occur simultaneously with your utterance of the word three.
•	 Make your gestures appropriate to your audience and situation.  Gestures must be
adapted to the audience. In more formal speaking situations, particularly when speaking to a
large audience, bolder, more sweeping, and more dramatic gestures are appropriate. A small
audience in a less formal setting calls for less formal gestures.
•	 Adapt gestures for video delivery.  The camera lens is generally only a few feet away from
you, which tends to amplify the intensity of your gestures and movement for the audience
viewing you on a TV or computer screen.
How
To
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 266 11/13/14 12:22 PM
267
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
those occasions, it can be appropriate to move from behind the lectern to make a
point, signal a change in mood, or move on to another idea.
Establish Immediacy  According to psychologist Albert Mehrabian,
immediacy is “the degree of physical or psychological closeness between
­people.”20 Immediacy behaviors are those that literally or psychologically make
your audience feel closer to you; because they create this perception of close-
ness, immediacy behaviors enhance the quality of the relationship between you
and your audience.21 Immediacy behaviors include the following:
•	 Standing or moving closer to your listeners
•	 Coming out from behind a lectern
•	 Using appropriate levels of eye contact
•	 Smiling while talking and, more specifically, smiling at individual audience
members
•	 Using appropriate gestures
•	 Having an appropriately relaxed posture
•	 Moving purposefully
More than three decades of research on the immediacy cues used by teach-
ers in North American classrooms has clearly established that teachers who are
more immediate enhance student learning, increase student motivation to learn,
and have more favorable teacher evaluations.22 It seems logical to suggest that
public speakers who increase immediacy will have similarly positive results.
One cautionary note: Listeners—not the speaker—determine the appropriate
amount of immediacy. Be vigilantly audience-centered as you seek the appro-
priate level of immediacy between you and your listeners. Temper our advice
about proximity and other delivery variables by adapting to the cultural expec-
tations of your audience.
Signal Transitions  Movement can provide listeners with a nonverbal
cue that you are beginning a new idea or major point in your speech. If you
make a transition statement or change from a serious subject to a more humor-
ous one, movement can also be a good way to signal that your approach to the
speaking situation is changing.
Posture
Although there have been few formal studies of posture in relation to public
speaking, there is evidence that the way in which you carry your body commu-
nicates significant information. Whereas your face and voice play the major role
in communicating a specific emotion, your posture communicates the intensity
of that emotion. If you are happy, your face and voice reflect your happiness;
your posture communicates the intensity of your joy.23
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 267 11/13/14 12:22 PM
268 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
Since the days of the elocutionists, few speech teachers or public-speaking
texts have advocated specific postures for public speakers. Today we believe that
the specific stance you adopt should come about naturally, as a result of what you
have to say, the environment, and the formality or informality of the occasion. For
example, during a very informal presentation, it may be perfectly appropriate as
well as comfortable and natural to sit on the edge of a desk. Most speech teachers,
however, do not encourage students to sit while delivering classroom speeches.
One study suggests that your stance can reflect on your credibility as a
speaker.24 Slouching over the lectern, for example, does not project an image of
vitality and interest in your audience. In addition, avoid hunching your shoul-
ders, shifting from foot to foot, or letting your head droop. To help you stand tall
when delivering a speech, here are two tips to keep in mind:
•	 First, stand up straight, pulling your shoulder blades back just a bit.
•	 Second, imagine that your head is being held up by a string so that you have
direct eye contact with your listeners while standing tall.
You don’t need to stay frozen in this position. Your posture should not call
­
attention to itself. Instead, it should reflect your interest in the speaking event
and your attention to the task at hand. But when you find yourself starting to
slump or slouch, pulling your shoulders back and tugging on the imaginary
string will give your posture an immediate positive boost.
Facial Expression
Media experts today doubt that Abraham Lincoln would have survived as a
politician in our appearance-conscious age of telegenic politicians. His facial ex-
pression, according to those who saw him, seemed wooden and unvaried.
Functions Of Facial Expressions  Your face plays a key role in ex-
pressing your thoughts and especially your emotions and attitudes.25 According
to cross-cultural studies by social psychologist Paul Ekman, nearly all people
around the world agree on the general meaning of facial expressions for six pri-
mary emotions: happiness, anger, surprise, sadness, disgust, and fear.26 Humans
are physically capable of producing thousands of different facial expressions,
but our faces most often express one of these six primary emotions or a blend of
expressions rather than a single emotion. Even a culturally diverse audience will
usually be able to read your emotional expressions clearly.
How To Use Effective Facial Expressions  Consider these tips for
monitoring your facial expression:
•	 Rehearse expressions. When you rehearse your speech, consider standing in
front of a mirror—or better yet, record video of yourself practicing your
speech. Are you allowing your face to communicate the emotional tone of
your thoughts? Be mindful of the emotion that you wish your audience
members to feel.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 268 11/13/14 12:22 PM
269
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
•	 Pay special attention to your facial expression when you begin your speech. Your
audience sees your face before they hear what you are going to say. Thus,
you have an opportunity to set the emotional tone for your message before
you start speaking. We are not advocating that you adopt a phony smile that
looks insincere and plastered on your face, but a pleasant facial expression
helps establish a positive emotional climate.
•	 Naturally vary your expression to match your message. Present somber news
with a more serious expression. Monitor your expression so that it commu-
nicates the emotion you intend.
•	 Use a pleasant expression when you can. Unless you are presenting sad or bad
news, have a naturally friendly, alert facial expression to signal your interest
in communicating with your listeners.
•	 Adapt expressions for video. When presenting a speech that will be seen only
on video, take care not to overly exaggerate your facial expression. Close-
ups can amplify the intensity of your emotional expressions.
Vocal Delivery
Have you ever listened to a radio announcer and imagined what he or she
looked like, only later to see a photograph of the announcer that drastically al-
tered your mental image? Vocal cues play an important part in creating the im-
pression we have of a speaker. Based on vocal cues alone, you make inferences
about a person’s age, status, occupation, ethnic origin, income, and a variety of
other matters.
As a public speaker, your voice is one of the most important delivery tools
you have as a public speaker for conveying your ideas to your audience. Your
credibility as a speaker and your ability to communicate your ideas clearly to your
listeners will in large part depend on your vocal delivery. Vocal delivery includes
pitch, speech rate, volume, pronunciation, articulation, pauses, and general varia-
tion of the voice. A speaker has at least two key vocal obligations to an audience:
Speak to be understood, and speak with vocal variety to maintain interest.
Speak To be Understood  To be understood, you need to consider four
aspects of vocal delivery: volume, articulation, dialect, and pronunciation.
Volume  The fundamental purpose of your vocal delivery is to speak loudly
enough that your audience can hear you. The volume of your speech is deter-
mined by the amount of air you project through your larynx, or voice box. More
air equals more volume of sound. In fact, the way you breathe has more impact
on the sound of your voice than almost anything else does. To ancient orators, a
person’s breath was the source of spiritual power. To breathe is to be filled with a
positive, powerful source of energy.
To breathe properly, you need to understand how to use your breathing mus-
cles. Your diaphragm, a muscle in your upper abdomen, helps to control sound
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 269 11/13/14 12:22 PM
270 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
volume by increasing airflow from your lungs through your voice box. If you
put your hands on the hollow in the center of your ribcage and say, “Ho-ho-ho,”
you will feel your muscles contracting and the air being forced out of your lungs.
Breathing from your diaphragm—that is, consciously expanding and ­
contracting
your abdomen as you breathe in and out, rather than merely ­
expanding your
chest as air flows into your lungs—can increase the volume of sound as well as
enhance the quality of your voice.
Articulation  The process of producing speech sounds clearly and dis-
tinctly is articulation. In addition to speaking loudly enough, you need to say
your words clearly, so that your audience can understand them. Without distinct
enunciation, or articulation of the sounds that make up words, your listeners
may not understand you or may fault you for simply not knowing how to speak
clearly and fluently. Here are some commonly misarticulated words:27
Dint instead of didn’t
Lemme instead of let me
Mornin instead of morning
Seeya instead of see you
Soun instead of sound
Wanna instead of want to
Wep instead of wept
Whadayado instead of what do you do
Many errors in articulation result from simple laziness. It takes more ef-
fort to articulate speech sounds clearly. Sometimes we are in a hurry to express
our ideas, but more often we simply get into the habit of mumbling, slurring,
and abbreviating. Such speech flaws might not keep your audience from un-
derstanding you, but poor enunciation does reflect on your credibility as a
speaker.
The best way to improve your articulation of sounds is first to identify
words or phrases that you have a tendency to slur or chop. Once you have iden-
tified them, practice saying the words correctly. Make sure you can hear the dif-
ference between the improper and proper pronunciations. A speech teacher can
help you to check your articulation.
Dialect  Most newscasters in North America use what is called standard
American pronunciation and do not typically have a strong dialect. A dialect is
a consistent style of pronouncing words that is common to an ethnic group or a
geographic region such as the South, New England, or the upper Midwest. In
the southern part of the United States, people prolong some vowel sounds when
they speak. And in the northern Midwest, the word about sometimes sounds like
“aboat.” In the previous century, it took a bit of adjustment for many Americans
to get used to President John Kennedy’s Bostonian pronunciation of Cuba as
­“Cuber” and Harvard as “Haaavahd.” Lyndon Johnson’s Texas twang was a
sharp contrast to Kennedy’s New England sound. George W. Bush’s Texas lilt
contrasted with the slight southern drawl of his predecessor, Bill Clinton. Al-
though President Obama has less of an identifiable dialect than either Clinton or
Bush did, he sometimes clips the ends of his words.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 270 11/13/14 12:22 PM
271
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
Is a dialect detrimental to effective communication with an audience? Al-
though a speaker’s dialect may identify that person as being from a certain part
of the country, it won’t necessarily affect the audience’s comprehension of the
information unless the dialect is so pronounced that the listeners can’t under-
stand the speaker’s words. Research does suggest, however, that listeners tend
to prefer a dialect that is similar to their own.28 We don’t recommend that you
eliminate your own mild dialect; but if your word pronunciation is significantly
distracting to your listeners, you might consider modifying it.
The four elements of a dialect include intonation pattern, vowel production,
consonant production, and speaking rate.
•	 Use proper intonation. A typical North American intonation pattern is pre-
dominantly a rising and falling pattern. The pattern looks something like
this:
“Good morning. How are you?”
Intonation patterns of other languages, such as Hindi, may remain on al-
most exactly the same pitch level; some native North American ears find the
monotone pitch distracting.
•	 Pronounce vowels clearly. Many people who speak English as a second lan-
guage often clip, or shorten, the vowel sounds, which can make comprehen-
sion more challenging. Stretching or elongating vowels within words can
be a useful skill for such speakers to develop. If this is a vocal skill that you
need to cultivate, consider recording your speech and then comparing it
with the standard American pronunciation you hear on TV or radio.
•	 Pronounce consonants appropriately. Consonant production varies depend-
ing on what language you are speaking. It is sometimes difficult to produce
clear consonants that are not overdone. Consonants that are so soft as to be
almost unheard may produce a long blur of unintelligible sound rather than
a crisply articulated sound.
•	 Use an appropriate speaking rate. People whose first language is not English
sometimes speak too fast, in the hope that this will create the impression
that they are very familiar with English. Slowing the rate just a bit often
enhances comprehension for native English speakers listening to someone
who is less familiar with English pronunciation. A rate that is too fast also
contributes to problems with clipped vowels, soft or absent consonants,
and an intonation pattern that is on one pitch level rather than comfortably
varied.
Pronunciation  Whereas articulation relates to the clarity of sounds,
­
pronunciation concerns the degree to which the sounds conform to those as-
signed to words in standard English. Mispronouncing words can detract from a
speaker’s credibility.29 If you are uncertain about how to pronounce a word, look
it up in an online dictionary. Most popular dictionaries provide recordings of the
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 271 11/13/14 12:22 PM
272 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
correct pronunciation of words. Often, however, we are not aware that we are not
using standard pronunciation unless someone points it out.
Some speakers reverse speech sounds, saying “aks” instead of “ask,” for ex-
ample. Some allow an “r” sound to intrude into some words, saying “warsh”
instead of “wash,” or leave out sounds in the middle of a word, as in “ackchally”
instead of “actually” or “Febuary” instead of “February.” Some speakers also
accent syllables in nonstandard ways; they say “POlice” instead of “poLICE” or
“UMbrella” rather than “umBRELla.”
If English is not your native language, you might have to spend extra time
working on your pronunciation and articulation. Here are two useful tips to
help you:
•	 Make an effort to prolong your vowel sounds. Speeeeak tooooo
proooooloooong eeeeeeach voooooowel soooooound yoooooooou
maaaaaaaake.
•	 To reduce choppy-sounding word pronunciation, blend the end of one word
into the beginning of the next. Make your speech flow from one word to the
next instead of separating it into individual chunks of sound.30
Speak with Variety  To speak with variety is to vary your pitch, rate, and
pauses. It is primarily through the quality of our voices, as well as our facial
expressions, that we communicate emotions, whether we are happy, sad, bored,
or excited. If your vocal cues suggest that you are bored with your topic, your
audience will probably be bored also. Appropriate variation in vocal pitch and
rate as well as appropriate use of pauses can add zest to your speech and help to
maintain audience attention.
Pitch Vocal pitch is how high or low your voice sounds. You can sing because
you can change the pitch of your voice to produce a melody. Lack of variation in
pitch has been consistently identified as one of the most distracting characteris-
tics of ineffective speakers. A monotone is boring.
Everyone has a habitual pitch. This is the range of your voice during normal
conversation. Some people have a habitually high pitch, whereas others have a
low pitch. The pitch of your voice is determined by how fast the folds in your
vocal cords vibrate: the faster the vibration, the higher the pitch.
Your voice has inflection when you raise or lower the pitch as you pro-
nounce words or sounds. The best public speakers appropriately vary their in-
flections. We’re not suggesting that you need to imitate a top-forty radio disk
jockey when you speak. But variation in your vocal inflection and overall pitch
helps you communicate the subtlety of your ideas.
In some cultures, vocal inflection plays a major role in helping people to
­
interpret the meaning of words. For example, Thai, Vietnamese, and Mandarin
Chinese languages purposely use such inflections as monotone, low, falling, high,
and rising.31 if you are a native speaker of a language in which pitch influences
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 272 11/13/14 12:22 PM
273
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
meaning, be mindful that listeners do not expect this in many Western languages,
although all languages rely on inflection to provide nuances of meaning.
Record your speech as you rehearse and evaluate your use of pitch and in-
flection. If you are not satisfied with your inflection, consider practicing your
speech with exaggerated variations in vocal pitch. Although you would not de-
liver your speech this way, it might help you to explore the expressive options
that are available to you.
Rate  How fast do you talk? Most speakers average between 120 and 180 words
per minute. There is no “best” speaking rate. The skill of great speakers does not
depend on a standard rate of speech. Daniel Webster purportedly spoke at about
90 words per minute, Franklin Roosevelt at 110, John F. Kennedy at a quick-paced
180. Martin Luther King Jr. started his “Dream” speech at 92 words a minute and
was speaking at 145 words per minute during his conclusion.32 The best rate de-
pends on two factors: your speaking style and the content of your message.
A common fault of many beginning speakers is to deliver a speech too
quickly. One symptom of speech anxiety is that you tend to rush through your
speech to get it over with. Feedback from others can help you to determine
whether your rate is too rapid. Recording your message and listening critically
to your speaking rate can help you to assess whether you are speaking at the
proper speed. Fewer speakers have the problem of speaking too slowly, but a
turtle-paced speech will almost certainly make it more difficult for your audi-
ence to maintain interest. Remember that your listeners can grasp information
much faster than you can speak it.
Pauses  Mark Twain said, “The right word may be effective, but no word
was ever as effective as a rightly timed pause.” An appropriate pause can often
do more to accent your message than any other vocal characteristic. President
­
Kennedy’s famous line “Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you
can do for your country” was effective not only because of its language but also
because it was delivered with a pause dividing the two thoughts. Try delivering
that line without the pause; it just doesn’t have the same power.
Effective use of pauses, also known as effective timing, can greatly enhance
the impact of your message. Whether you are trying to tell a joke, a serious tale,
or a dramatic story, your use of a pause can determine the effectiveness of your
anecdote. Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert, Seth Meyers, David Letterman, Jimmy
Fallon, and Ellen DeGeneres are masters at timing a punch line.
Beware, however, of the vocalized pause. Many beginning public speakers
are uncomfortable with silence, and so, rather than pausing where it seems natu-
ral and normal, they vocalize sounds such as “umm,” “er,” “you know,” and
“ah.” We think you will agree that “Ask not, ah, what your, er, country can do,
ah, for you; ask, you know, what you, umm, can do, er, for your, uh, country”
just doesn’t have the same impact as the unadorned original statement.
One research study counted how frequently certain people use “uhs.”33 Sci-
ence professors in this study said “uh” about 1.4 times a minute; humanities
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 273 11/13/14 12:22 PM
274 Delivering Your Speech
13.3
professors timed in at 4.8 times a minute—almost 3.5 times more. Another
psychologist counted the “ums” per minute of well-known speakers. Wheel of
Fortune host Pat Sajak won the count with almost 10 “ums” per minute; and
although he sometimes pokes fun at well-known politicians who use vocal-
ized pauses, ­
David Letterman was a close second with 8.1. Former President
Bill Clinton had only 0.79 vocalized pause per minute. As a public speaker, you
don’t want to be the winner of this contest by having the most “uhs” and “ums”
when you speak. Vocalized pauses will annoy your audience and detract from
your credibility; eliminate them.
Silence can be an effective tool in emphasizing a particular word or sen-
tence. A well-timed pause coupled with eye contact can powerfully accent your
thought. Asking your audience a rhetorical question such as “How many of you
would like to improve your communication skills?” will be more effective if
you pause after asking the question rather than rushing into the next thought.
­
Silence is a way of saying to your audience, “Think about this for a moment.”
Concert pianist Arthur Schnabel said this about silence and music: “The notes I
handle no better than many pianists. But the pauses between the notes, ah, that
is where the art resides.”34 In speech, too, an effective use of a pause can add
emphasis and interest.
Quick Check
Characteristics of Good Vocal Delivery
Good Speakers
Speak with adequate volume
Articulate speech sounds clearly and
distinctly
Pronounce words accurately
Have varied pitch
Vary their speaking rate
Pause to emphasize ideas
Poor Speakers
Speak too softly to be heard
Slur speech sounds
Mispronounce words
Have a monotonous pitch
Consistently speak too fast or too
slowly
Rarely pause or pause too long
Using A Microphone  “Testing. Testing. One . . . two . . . three. Is this on?”
These are not effective opening remarks. Yet countless public speakers have
found themselves trying to begin a speech, only to be upstaged by an uncoop-
erative public address system. No matter how polished your gestures or well-
intoned your vocal cues, if you are inaudible or use a microphone awkwardly,
your speech will not have the desired effect.
There are three kinds of microphones, only one of which demands much
technique:
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 274 11/13/14 12:22 PM
275
Characteristics of Effective Delivery 13.3
•	 Wireless hand-held microphones and lavaliere microphones allow speakers
to move freely. The lavaliere microphone is often clipped to the front of
a shirt or jacket by newspeople and interviewees. It requires no particular
care other than not to thump it or accidentally knock it off.
•	 The boom microphone is used by makers of movies and TV shows. It hangs
over the heads of the speakers and is remote-controlled, so the speaker need
not be particularly concerned with it.
•	 The third kind of microphone, and the most common, is the stationary
­microphone. This is the type that is most often found attached to a lectern,
­
sitting on a desk, or standing on the floor. Generally, the stationary ­microphones
that are used today are multidirectional. You do not have to remain frozen in
front of a stationary mike while delivering your speech. When ­
using a station-
ary microphone, consider the suggestions in the preceding How To box.
Personal Appearance
Most people have certain expectations about the way a speaker should look. One
of your audience analysis tasks is to identify what those audience expectations
are. This can be trickier than it might at first seem. Appropriate wardrobe varies
depending on climate, custom, culture, and audience expectations. In ­
addition,
wardrobe styles can quickly become outdated.
Use a Stationary Microphone
•	 Prepare before your speech.  Practice will accustom you to any voice distortion or echo that
might occur so that these sound qualities do not surprise you during your speech. Under ideal
circumstances, you will be able to practice with the same type of microphone you will use
when you speak. Check to make sure that your microphone is indeed multidirectional and can
pick up your voice even if you aren’t speaking directly into it. Figure out where to stand for the
best sound quality and how sensitive the mike is to extraneous noise.
•	 Test with care.  If you must test a microphone, count or ask the audience whether they can
hear you. Tapping or blowing on a microphone produces an irritating noise you should avoid.
•	 Speak clearly and crisply.  Microphones amplify sloppy habits of pronunciation and enuncia-
tion. Be especially careful when articulating such “explosive” sounding consonants as B and P;
they can be overamplified by the microphone and produce a slight popping sound. Similarly,
a microphone can intensify the sibilance of the S sound at the beginning or ending of words
(such as in hiss, sometime, or specials). You might have to articulate these sounds with slightly
less intensity to avoid creating overamplified, distracting noises.
•	 Make sure your voice is the only sound amplified.  Do not tap, pound, or shuffle anything near
the microphone. These noises will be heard by the audience loudly and clearly. If you are using
note cards, quietly slide them aside as you progress through your speech.
•	 Speak at your normal volume.  Some speakers speak more quietly when they have a micro-
phone in front of them, becoming inaudible.
How
To
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 275 11/13/14 12:22 PM
276 Delivering Your Speech
13.4
Your appearance sets the tone for your talk. For example, most CEOs who
speak to their stockholders at the annual stockholders meeting typically wear
a suit and tie—but not the late Steve Jobs, head of Apple. To communicate his
casual and contemporary approach to business, he often wore jeans and sweater.
The current CEO of Apple, Tim Cook, also adopts a casual look to communicate
a comfortable leadership style as does Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft.
There is considerable evidence that your personal appearance affects how
your audience will respond to you and your message, particularly during the
opening moments of your presentation. If you violate their expectations about ap-
pearance, you will be less successful in achieving your purpose. One study found,
for example, that men who have a nose ring are less likely to be hired during a job
interview.35 Yet even this research conclusion is based on a specific situation and
time; years from now, a nose ring may have no impact, either positive or negative,
on a person’s credibility. Our point: It’s the audience and the cultural expectations
of audience members that determine whether a speaker’s personal appearance is
appropriate or not, not some fashion guru or magazine editor.
Audience Diversity and Delivery
13.4	 Use strategies for adapting your delivery when speaking to diverse
audiences.
Most of the suggestions that we have offered in this chapter assume that your lis-
teners will be expecting a typical North American approach to delivery. However,
many of these assumptions are based on research responses from U.S. college stu-
dents, who are predominantly white and in their late teens or early twenties, so our
suggestions are not applicable to every audience. As we have stressed throughout
the book, you need to adapt your presentation to the expectations of your listen-
ers, especially those with different cultural backgrounds from your own. Consider
the following suggestions to help you develop strategies for adapting both your
verbal and your nonverbal messages for a culturally diverse audience.
•	 Avoid an ethnocentric mind-set. As you learned in Chapter 6, ethnocentrism
is the assumption that your own cultural approaches are superior to those
of other cultures. When considering how to adapt your delivery style to
your audience, try to view other approaches and preferences not as right or
wrong but merely as different from your own.
•	 Consider using a less dramatic style for predominantly high-context listeners. A
high-context culture places considerable emphasis on unspoken messages.
Therefore, for a high-context audience, you need not be overly expressive.
For example, for many people from Asian countries, a delivery style that
included passionate gestures, overly dramatic facial expressions, and fre-
quent movements might seem overdone. A more subtle, less demonstrative
approach would create less “noise” and be more effective.
13.4
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 276 11/13/14 12:22 PM
277
Audience Diversity and Delivery 13.4
•	 Consult with other speakers who have presented to your audience. Talk with people
you may know who are familiar with the cultural expectations of the ­
audience
you will address. Ask specific questions. For example, when speaking in
­
Poland, one of the authors expected the speech to start promptly at 11 a.m.,
as announced in the program and on posters. By 11:10, it was clear the speech
would not begin on time. In Poland, it turns out, all students know about the
“academic quarter.” This means that most lectures and speeches begin at least
15 minutes—a quarter hour—after the announced starting time. If the author
had asked another professor about the audience’s expectations, he would
have known this custom in advance. As you observe or talk with speakers
who have addressed your target audience, ask the following questions:
What are audience expectations about where I should stand while
speaking?
Do listeners like direct eye contact?
When will the audience expect me to start and end my talk?
Will listeners find movement and gestures distracting or welcome?
•	 Monitor your level of immediacy with your audience. As we noted earlier,
speaker immediacy involves how close you are to your listeners, the amount
of eye contact you display, and whether you speak from behind or in front
of a lectern. North Americans seem to prefer immediacy behaviors from
speakers. Some cultures may expect less immediacy. For example, we’ve
been told that Japanese audiences don’t expect speakers to move from be-
hind a lectern and stand very close to listeners. Even in small seminars,
­
Japanese speakers and teachers typically stay behind the lectern. The key is
not to violate what listeners expect.36
•	 Monitor your expression of emotion. Not all cultures interpret and express
­
emotions the same way. People from the Middle East and the Mediterranean
are typically more expressive and animated in their conversation than are
northern Europeans.37 People from a high-context culture—a culture in which
nonverbal messages are exceptionally important (such as Japanese or ­
Chinese)—
place greater emphasis on the delivery of a message than do people from a
­
low-context culture (such as North Americans).38 Remember, however, that
even though you may be speaking to an audience from a low-context ­
culture—a
culture that places a high value on verbal messages—you do not have license
to ignore how you deliver a message. Delivery is always important.
•	 Know the code. Communication occurs when speaker and listener share the
same code system—both verbal and nonverbal. Your words can be ­translated,
but learning the nonverbal code of your audience is also ­
important. One
of your authors embarrassed himself with a Caribbean ­
audience ­
because
he used a circled thumb and finger gesture to ­
signal “okay” to compli-
ment a student. Later he discovered that this was an obscene ­
gesture—
like ­
extending a middle finger to a North American audience. Even subtle
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 277 11/13/14 12:22 PM
278 Delivering Your Speech
13.5
nonverbal messages communicate feelings, attitudes, and cues about the
nature of the relationship between you and your audience, so it is important
to avoid gestures or expressions that might offend your listeners. There is
no universal dictionary of nonverbal meaning, so spend some time asking
people who are from the same culture as your prospective audience about
what gestures and expressions your audience will appreciate.
•	 Prepare for working with a translator. The How To box offers advice for when
you are invited to address listeners who speak a language different from
your own and your message is translated.
We are not suggesting that you totally abandon your own cultural expec-
tations about speech delivery. Rather, we urge you to become sensitive and
­
responsive to cultural differences.
Rehearsing Your Speech:
Some Final Tips
13.5	 Describe the steps to follow when you rehearse your speech.
Do you want to make a good grade on your next speech? Then thoroughly re-
hearse your speech. As indicated in Figure 13.1, rehearsing your speech helps
you to prepare to deliver your speech to an audience. And research suggests
13.5
Work Well with a Translator
•	 Learn enough of the language to provide at least an opening greeting in the language of your
listeners: “Good morning” (Buenos dias) or “Good evening” (Buenos noches).
•	 Speak more slowly than normal, to give your translator time to listen and repeat your message.
•	 Cut your content in half. If you are allowed 20 minutes to speak, plan 10 minutes of content,
because your translator will be repeating what you say in the language of the your audience.
•	 Use short, simple sentences. Pause frequently to give your translator time to translate your message.
•	 If possible, give your translator an outline of your message.
•	 Avoid slang, jargon, and figures of speech such as “pony up,” “elephant in the room,” “piggy-
back,” “clear as a bell,” and “thick as thieves.”
•	 Use jokes and humor with caution: Jokes often do not translate well.
•	 Consider using computer-generated slides to help your translator. If possible, have your slides
translated into the language of your audience.
•	 If your audience shows nonverbal clues that something you (or your translator) said is unclear,
ask the audience if your message is clear.
Source: “Don’t Get Lost in Translation,” Herald, Vol. 157, 4 (April 2010), p. 32. Reprinted with
permission of Community of Christ.
How
To
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 278 11/17/14 12:23 PM
279
Rehearsing Your Speech: Some Final Tips 13.5
that one of the best predictors of the effectiveness of a speech is the amount of
time you spend preparing and rehearsing it; instructors gave higher grades to
students who spent more time rehearsing their speeches and gave lower grades
to students who spent less time preparing and rehearsing.39 The following sug-
gestions can help you make the most of your rehearsal time.
•	 Give yourself plenty of time. Finish drafting your speech outline at least two
days before your speech performance.
•	 Practice before making speaking notes. Before you prepare the speaking notes
to use in front of your audience, rehearse your speech aloud. This will help
you determine where you will need notes to prompt yourself.
•	 Time your speech. Revise your speech as necessary to keep it within the time
limits set by your instructor or whoever invited you to speak.
•	 Prepare your speaking notes as you rehearse. Use whatever system works best
for you. Some speakers use pictorial symbols to remind themselves of a
story or an idea. Others use complete sentences or just words or phrases in
an outline pattern to prompt them. Most teachers advocate using note cards
for speaking notes. Some speakers use an iPad or other electronic display.
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main
Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select
and Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Figure 13.1 Rehearsing your speech delivery will help you to
present your speech with confidence.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 279 11/13/14 12:22 PM
280 Delivering Your Speech
13.6
If you do use electronic notes, it is wise to have a hard copy backup in case
you experience technology problems.
•	 Rehearse your speech standing up. This will help you to get a feel for your use
of gestures as well as your vocal delivery. However, do not try to memorize
your speech or plan specific gestures. As you rehearse, you might want to
modify your speaking notes to reflect appropriate changes.
•	 Rehearse with an audience. If you can, present your speech to someone else so
that you can practice establishing eye contact. Seek feedback from your cap-
tive audience about both your delivery and your speech content.
•	 Record your rehearsals. If possible, make an audio or video recording of your
speech during the rehearsal stage. Most smartphones, computers, and tab-
lets have a built-in camera and microphone. You can use the recording to
observe your vocal and physical mannerisms and then and make necessary
changes. Many speakers still find it useful to practice before a mirror so that
they can observe their body language—it’s low-tech, but it still works.
•	 Rehearse using all your presentation aids. As we discuss in the next chapter,
don’t wait until the last minute to plan, prepare, and rehearse with flip-
charts, computer-generated slides, handouts, or other aids that you will
need to manipulate as you speak.
•	 Make rehearsals realistic. Re-creating, as much as possible, the speaking situa-
tion you will face will help you gain confidence. If you will be speaking in a
large classroom, find a large classroom in which to rehearse your speech. If
your audience will be seated informally in a semicircle, then this should be
the context in which you rehearse your speech.
•	 Practice good delivery skills while rehearsing. Remember this maxim: Practice
makes perfect if practice is perfect.
Delivering Your Speech
13.6	 List four suggestions for enhancing the final delivery of your speech.
The day of your speech arrives, and you are ready. Using information about your
audience as an anchor, you have developed a speech on an interesting topic and
with a fine-tuned purpose. Your central idea is clearly identified. You have gath-
ered interesting and relevant material and organized it well. Your speech has
an appropriate introduction, a logically arranged body, and a clear conclusion
that nicely summarizes your key theme. You have rehearsed your speech several
times; it is not memorized, but you are comfortable with the way in which you
express the major ideas. Your last task is calmly and confidently to communicate
with your audience. You are ready to deliver your speech (see Figure 13.2).
As the time for presenting your speech to your audience approaches, con-
sider the following suggestions to help you prepare for a successful performance.
13.6
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 280 11/13/14 12:22 PM
281
Delivering Your Speech 13.6
•	 Get plenty of sleep before your speech. Last-minute, late-night final preparations
can take the edge off your performance. Many professional public speakers
also advocate that you watch what you eat before you speak; a heavy meal
or too much caffeine can have a negative effect on your performance.
•	 Review the suggestions in Chapter 2 for becoming a confident speaker. It is normal
to have prespeech jitters. But if you have developed a well-organized, audi-
ence-centered message on a topic of genuine interest to you, you’ve done all
the right things to make your speech a success. Remember some of the other
tips for developing confidence: Re-create the speech environment when you
rehearse. Use deep breathing techniques to help you relax. Make sure you
are especially familiar with your introduction and conclusion. Act calm to
feel calm.
•	 Arrive early for your speaking engagement. If the room is in an unfamiliar lo-
cation, give yourself plenty of time to find it. Budget your time so you do
not spend your moments before you speak hurriedly looking for a parking
place or frantically trying to attend to last-minute details.
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main
Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select
and Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Figure 13.2  Delivering the speech is the culmination of the
audience-centered speechmaking process.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 281 11/13/14 12:22 PM
282 Delivering Your Speech
13.7
•	 Prepare the room and equipment. You may want to rearrange the furniture or
make other changes in the speaking environment. If you are using audio-
visual equipment, check to see that it is working properly, and set up your
support material carefully. Prepare a PowerPoint slide or two to make sure
the image is clear.
•	 Visualize success. Picture yourself delivering your speech in an effective
way. Also, remind yourself of the effort you have spent preparing for your
speech. A final mental rehearsal can boost your confidence and help ensure
success.
Even though we have identified many time-tested methods for enhancing
your speech delivery, keep in mind that speech delivery is an art rather than a
science. The manner of your delivery should reflect your personality and indi-
vidual style.
Responding to Questions
13.7	 Explain and use strategies for responding to questions from your
audience at the end of your speech.
It’s possible that a speech you deliver will be followed by a question-and-
answer (Q & A) session. During a Q & A session, your delivery method will
change to impromptu speaking. These sessions can be especially challenging
because, although you may not know the questions in advance, you will be ex-
pected to deliver your answers thoughtfully and smoothly. In addition to the
suggestions for impromptu speaking we offered earlier, here are additional tips
to make the Q & A period less challenging:40
•	 Prepare. One of the best ways to prepare for a Q & A session is to anticipate
what questions you may be asked. How do you anticipate questions? You
analyze your audience. Think of possible questions those particular listen-
ers might ask you, and then rehearse your answers. Prior to presidential
debates, candidates have their staff members pepper them with questions
so the candidates can practice responding. Perhaps your friends can ask you
questions after you have rehearsed your speech for them.
•	 Repeat or rephrase the question. Repeating a question helps in four ways. First,
your paraphrase makes sure that everyone can hear the question. Second,
paraphrasing ensures that you understand the question before you go
charging off with your answer. Third, by paraphrasing, you can succinctly
summarize rambling questions. And, finally, repeating the question gives
you just a bit of time to think about your answer.
•	 Stay on message. Sometimes listeners may ask questions unrelated to your
talk. If this happens, you’ll want to find a way to gently guide your ques-
tioner back to the message you have prepared. Keep bringing the audience
13.7
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 282 11/13/14 12:22 PM
283
Responding to Questions 13.7
back to your central idea. Your answers, rather than the questions, are what
are important. We’re not suggesting that you dodge questions; you should
address the question asked, but then reemphasize the key points you have
made. Some seasoned speakers suggest that you save a bit of your speech
to deliver during the Q & A session. It’s called giving a “double-barreled”
talk.41 You present your speech, and then, during the Q & A period, you give
your second, much briefer speech.
•	 Respond to the audience, not just the person who asked the question. Although
you can start your response by having eye contact with the person who
asked you a question, make sure that you stay audience-centered. Look at
all audience members and keep in mind that your response should be rel-
evant to them. If the questioner wants specific information that is of interest
only to that person, you could speak with the questioner individually after
your speech.
•	 Ask yourself the first question. One way to prime the audience for the Q & A
session is to ask yourself a challenging question first. For example, you might
say, “As we move into Q & A, a number of you may be wondering. . . .”
State the question, and answer it. Doing this also gives you a comfortable
way to make a transition between the speech and the Q & A period. Ask-
ing yourself a tough question tells the audience that you’re open for serious
questions, and it snaps them to attention as well.
•	 Listen nonjudgmentally. Use the effective listening skills that we discussed in
Chapter 5. Keep your eyes focused on the person asking the question, lean
forward slightly, and give your full attention to the questioner. Audience
members expect speakers to be polite and attentive. If you think the ques-
tion is stupid, don’t say so. Just listen and respond courteously. Audience
members can judge for themselves whether a question was appropriate or
not. Don’t wince, grimace, or scowl at the questioner. You’ll gain more cred-
ibility by keeping your cool than by losing your composure.
•	 Neutralize hostile questions. Every hostile question gives you an opportunity
to score points with your listeners. You’ll have your listeners’ attention; use
that attention to your advantage. The following strategies can help:
Restate the question. If the question was a lengthy attack, focus on the
essence of the issue. Suppose a questioner says, “Your ideas are just
wrong! I’m angry that you have no clue as to how to proceed. Your
proposal has been a disaster in the past. Why are you still trying to
make it work?” A paraphrase could be “You’re asking me why I’m still
trying to implement a program that hasn’t been successful. From your
perspective, the program has failed.”
Acknowledge emotions. For example, you could say, “I can understand
why you are angry. I share your anger and frustration. It’s because of
my frustration that I want to give my proposal more time to work.”
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 283 11/13/14 12:22 PM
284 Delivering Your Speech
13.7
Don’t make the issue personal. Even if the hostile questioner has made
you the villain, don’t attack the person who asked the question. Keep
the conversation focused on issues, not on personalities.
Get to the heart of the issue. Respond directly to a hostile question.
Consider restating the evidence that you presented in your speech. Or
provide new insights to support your position.
•	 When you don’t know, admit it. If you’ve been asked a question to which you
don’t know the answer, just say so. You can promise to find out more infor-
mation and then get back to the person later. (If you make such a promise,
follow through on it. Ask for the person’s business card or email address at
the end of the Q & A session.)
•	 Be brief. Even if you have anticipated questions and have a double-barreled
talk, make your answers short and to the point.
•	 Use organizational signposts. Quickly organize your responses. If you have
two responses to a question, let your listeners know it. Then use a verbal
signpost (a statement that clues your audience in to how you’re organizing
your message) by saying, “I have two responses. First. . . .” When you get to
your second point, say, “My second point is. . . .” These signposts will both
help you to stay organized and impress your listeners with your clarity.
•	 Indicate when the Q & A period is concluding. Tell your audience, “I have time
for two more questions.” Let them know that the Q & A session will soon
conclude. Even if you have someone helping you to moderate the discus-
sion, you should remain in charge of concluding the session.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 284 11/13/14 12:22 PM
285
Chapter 13 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
13.1	 Identify three reasons delivery is important to a public speaker.
Nonverbal communication conveys the majority of the meaning of your speech
and nearly all of your emotions to an audience. Nonverbal expectancy theory
suggests that your credibility as a speaker depends on meeting your audience’s
expectations about nonverbal communications. Audiences will believe what
they see in your nonverbal communication more readily than what they hear in
your words.
Key Terms
Nonverbal
 communication
Nonverbal expectancy
 theory
Emotional contagion
 theory
13.2	 Identify and describe four methods of delivery.
Of the four methods of delivery—manuscript, memorized, impromptu, and ex-
temporaneous—the extemporaneous method is the most desirable in most situ-
ations. Speak from an outline without memorizing the exact words.
Key Terms
Manuscript speaking
Memorized speaking
Impromptu speaking
Extemporaneous speaking
13.3	 Identify and illustrate the characteristics of effective delivery.
Eye contact is the single most important delivery variable. Make eye contact with
the whole audience before and throughout your speech. Your gestures and move-
ments should appear natural and relaxed, definite, consistent with your message,
varied, unobtrusive, and coordinated with what you say, as well as ­
appropriate
to your audience and situation. Adapt gestures to the ­
cultural ­
diversity of your
­
audience. Use your posture, facial expressions, and vocal cues—including pitch,
rate of speaking, and use of pauses—to communicate your emotions. Be sure
to speak loudly enough and to articulate clearly. If ­
English is not your native
­
language, you may have to spend extra time working on your pronunciation and
articulation.
Key Terms
Immediacy
Immediacy behaviors
Volume
Articulation
Dialect
Pronunciation
Pitch
Inflection
Lavaliere microphone
Boom microphone
Stationary microphone
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 285 11/13/14 12:22 PM
286 Chapter 13 study guide
13.4	 Use strategies for adapting your delivery when speaking to diverse
audiences.
Consult with other speakers familiar with your audience to help you avoid eth-
nocentrism. Consider using a more suitable delivery style with high-context
audiences, and match immediacy and emotional expression to the cultural ex-
pectations of the majority of listeners. Learn variations in meanings of nonverbal
gestures across cultures to avoid giving offense.
13.5	 Describe the steps to follow when you rehearse your speech.
Allow at least two days after finishing your speech outline to practice your
speech delivery and develop your speaking notes. As much as possible, re-create
the speech environment when you rehearse. Rehearse your speech while keep-
ing your audience in mind; imagine that your audience is in front of you as you
practice presenting your message.
13.6	 List four suggestions for enhancing the final delivery of your speech.
Get a good night’s rest before a speech. Visualize your success and reinforce
your confidence using the suggestions from Chapter 2 of this book. Arrive early
so that you have time to prepare the speaking environment and are not stressed
by running late.
13.7	 Explain and use strategies for responding to questions from your
audience at the end of your speech.
Prepare for Q & A and be ready to ask the first question yourself. Listen non-
judgmentally and repeat or rephrase questions. Respond briefly and to the
whole audience. Use strategies described in this chapter to neutralize hostile
questions and bring off-topic questions back to your message. Admit it when
you don’t know an answer. Use organized signposts to clarify answers and to
signal the end of Q & A.
Think about These Questions
•	 Roger was so nervous about his first speech that he practiced it again and
again. He could have given the speech in his sleep. He had some great
examples, and his instructor had praised his outline. But as he gave his
speech, he saw his classmates tuning out. What might he have done wrong,
and how could he have rescued his speech?
•	 Monique is self-conscious about her hand gestures, and she often just puts
her hands behind her back. What advice would you give Monique to help
her use gestures more effectively?
•	 Most politicians at the state or national level hire image consultants to help
them project the most positive impression of their skills and abilities. Is it
ethical to use such consultants, especially when their sole objective is to
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 286 11/13/14 12:22 PM
287
Chapter 13 study guide
manipulate constituents into thinking that the speaker is more credible than
he or she really is?
•	 You are planning to speak to a local group of businesspeople who all share
a culture different from your own. What questions might you ask the per-
son who invited you to speak, in order to help you adapt to your audience?
•	 Aspen felt quite nervous as she gave her speech, and her instructor later
commented that she had spoken so fast that some of her words were hard
to understand. Review the strategies for managing speech apprehension
in Chapter 2 and the delivery advice in this chapter to recommend specific
steps Aspen can take to reduce her nervousness as well as slow her speech
rate for her next presentation.
M13_BEEB3981_05_SE_C13_253-288.indd 287 11/13/14 12:22 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
289
Chapter 14
Designing and Using
Presentation Aids
“The soul never
thinks without a
picture.”
—Aristotle
	14.1	The Value of Presentation Aids
	14.2	Types of Presentation Aids
Three-Dimensional Presentation
Aids
Two-Dimensional Presentation
Aids
Computer-Generated Presentation
Aids
Tips for Using Computer-
Generated Presentation Aids
Audiovisual Aids
Outline
(continued)
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 289 11/18/14 11:27 AM
290 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14
Learning Objectives
	14.1	Discuss five ways in which presentation aids help communicate
ideas to an audience.
	14.2	Describe the types of presentation aids and identify tips for using
them effectively.
	14.3	Identify guidelines for developing effective presentation aids.
	14.4	Identify guidelines for effectively using presentation aids.
Perhaps it has happened to you. A professor flashes one PowerPointTM slide after
another while droning on about British history or some other topic. As you sit
there, bored out of your socks, you think, “Why doesn’t she just hand out the
PowerPoint slides or put them online and let us go? I don’t need her to read her
notes to me.” Following such a mind-numbing experience, you can understand
the phrase “death by PowerPoint.”
PowerPoint and the multitude of other presentation aids that speakers may
use—especially visual aids—are powerful tools. They can help communicate
your ideas with greater clarity and impact than can words alone. But they can
also overwhelm your speech or be so redundant that your audience tunes you
out. This chapter will help you to avoid being a PowerPoint “executioner” and
ensure that your presentation aids add life to your speech rather than killing
your message.
A presentation aid is any object that reinforces your point visually or ­
aurally
so that your audience can better understand it. Charts, photographs, posters,
drawings, graphs, PowerPoint slides, movies, and videos are just some of the
	14.3	Guidelines for Developing
Presentation Aids
Make Them Easy to See
Keep Them Simple
Select the Right Presentation Aid
Do Not Use Dangerous or Illegal
Presentation Aids
	14.4	Guidelines for Using Presentation
Aids
Rehearse with Your Presentation
Aids
Make Eye Contact with Your
Audience, Not with Your
Presentation Aids
Explain Your Presentation Aids
Do Not Pass Objects among
Members of Your Audience
Use Animals with Caution
Use Handouts Effectively
Time the Use of Visuals to Control
Your Audience’s Attention
Use Technology Effectively
Remember Murphy’s Law
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 290 11/18/14 11:27 AM
291
The Value of Presentation Aids 14.1
types of presentation aids that we will discuss. Some of these, such as movies
and videos, call on sound as well as sight to help you make your point. In this
chapter, we look at presentation aids as an important communication tool, and
we examine several kinds of aids. Toward the end of the chapter, we suggest
guidelines for using presentation aids in your speeches.
The Value of Presentation Aids
14.1	 Discuss five ways in which presentation aids help communicate ideas
to an audience.
When you are first required to give a speech using presentation aids, you may
wonder, “How can I use presentation aids in an informative or persuasive
speech? Those kinds of speeches don’t lend themselves to visual images.” As
it happens, almost any speech can benefit from presentation aids. A speech for
which you are expected to use presentation aids is not as different from other
types of speeches as you might at first think. Your general objective is still to in-
form, persuade, or entertain. The key difference is that you will use supporting
material that can be seen, rather than only heard, by an audience.
Today’s listeners expect visual support. Presentation aids help your audi-
ence understand and remember your message, and they help you communicate
the organization of ideas, gain and maintain attention, and illustrate a sequence of
events or procedures.1
•	 Presentation aids enhance understanding. Of your five senses, you learn more
from sight than from all the others combined. In fact, it has been estimated
that more than 80 percent of all information comes to you through sight.2
To many people, seeing is believing. We are a visually oriented society. For
example, most of us learn the news by seeing it presented on TV or the In-
ternet. Because your audience is accustomed to visual reinforcement, it is
wise to consider how you can increase their understanding of your speech
by using presentation aids.
•	 Presentation aids enhance memory. Your audience will not only have an im-
proved understanding of your speech, but they will also better remember
what you say as a result of visual reinforcement.3 There is evidence that
high-tech presentation aids enhance learning.4 Researchers estimate that we
remember 10 percent of what we read, 20 percent of what we hear, 30 percent
of what we see, and 50 percent of what we simultaneously hear and see. For
example, in your speech about the languages spoken in Africa, your audi-
ence is more likely to remember words in Arabic, Swahili, and Hausa if you
display the words visually rather than just speaking them.
•	 Presentation aids help listeners organize ideas. Most listeners need help under-
standing the structure of a speech. Even if you clearly lay out your major
14.1
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 291 11/18/14 11:27 AM
292 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.1
points, use effective internal summaries, and make clear transition statements,
your listeners will welcome additional help. Briefly listing major ideas on a
PowerPoint slide, a chart, or a poster can add clarity to your talk and help
your audience grasp your main ideas. Visually presenting your major ideas
during your introduction, for example, can help your audience follow them
as you bring them into the body of your speech. And you can display key
ideas during your conclusion to help summarize your message succinctly.
•	 Presentation aids help you gain and maintain attention. Keshia began her speech
about poverty in the United States by showing a photo of the face of an
undernourished child. She immediately had the attention of her audience.
Chuck introduced his presentation on photography with the flash of his
camera. He certainly alerted his audience at that point. Midway through her
speech about the lyrics in rap music, Tomoko not only spoke the words of
a song but also displayed a giant poster of the song lyrics so that her audi-
ence could read the words and sing along. Presentation aids not only grab
the attention of your listeners but also keep their interest when words alone
might not.
•	 Presentation aids help illustrate a sequence of events or procedures. If your
­
purpose is to inform an audience about a process—how to do ­
something
or how something functions—you can do this best through actual
­
demonstrations or with a series of visuals. Demonstrating the step-by-step
procedures helps your audience to understand them.5 If you wish to explain
how ­
hydroelectric power is generated, a series of diagrams can help your
listeners understand and visualize the process. When demonstrating how
to make your prize-winning cinnamon rolls, you can prepare each step of
the proc­
ess ahead of time and show your audience each example as you
describe the relevant step. A climax to your speech could be to unveil a
­
finished pan of rolls still warm from the oven.
Contemporary audiences are quite different from those of more than a cen-
tury ago, when Thomas Edison invented the kinetoscope, a precursor of the
movie camera. Edison said, “When we started out it took the average ­
audience
a long time to assimilate each image. They weren’t trained to visualize more
than one thought at a time.”6 Times have changed. The predominance of ­
visual
images—on TV, in movies, on the Internet, and on our phones and mobile
­
devices—attests to how central images are in the communication of information
to modern audiences.
Contemporary communicators understand the power of visual rhetoric in
informing and persuading others. Visual rhetoric is the use of images as an inte-
grated element in the total communication effort a speaker makes to achieve his
or her speaking goal.7 To be a visual rhetorician is to assume the role of an audi-
ence member and consider not only what a listener hears but also what a listener
sees. Today’s sophisticated listeners expect a visually satisfying message to help
them make sense out of what you are saying.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 292 11/18/14 11:27 AM
293
Types of Presentation Aids 14.2
Types of Presentation Aids
14.2	 Describe the types of presentation aids and identify tips for using them
effectively.
The first question many students ask when they learn that they are required to
use presentation aids is “What type of presentation aid should I use?” We will
discuss three classes of presentation aids: three-dimensional, two-dimensional,
and audiovisual.
Three-Dimensional Presentation Aids
Objects  You have played the trombone since you were in fifth grade, so you
decide to give an informative speech about the history and function of this in-
strument. Your trombone is the obvious presentation aid that you would show
to your audience as you describe how it works. You might play a few measures
to demonstrate its sound and your talent. Or perhaps you are an art major and
you have just finished a watercolor painting. Why not bring your picture to class
to illustrate your talk about watercolor techniques?
Objects add interest because they are tangible. They can be touched, smelled,
heard, and even tasted as well as seen. Objects are real, and audiences like the
real thing.
When you use an object to illustrate an idea, make sure that you can handle
the object with ease. If an object is too large, it can be unwieldy and difficult to
show to your audience. Tiny objects can be seen only close up. It will be impos-
sible for your listeners to see the detail on your antique thimble, the intricate
needlework on your cross-stitch sampler, or the attention to detail in your min-
iature log cabin. Other objects can be dangerous to handle. One speaker, who
attempted a demonstration of how to string an archery bow, made his audience
extremely uncomfortable when his almost-strung bow flew over their heads. He
certainly got their attention, but he lost his credibility.
14.2
Quick Check
The Value of Presentation Aids
Presentation aids help your audience
•	 understand your message.
•	 remember your message.
•	 see the organization of your message.
•	 maintain attention.
•	 understand a sequence of events or procedures.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 293 11/18/14 11:27 AM
294 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.2
Models  If it is not possible to bring along the object you would like to show
your audience, consider showing them a model of it. You cannot bring a World
War II fighter plane to class, so buy or build a scale model instead. To illustrate
her lecture about human anatomy, one student brought a plastic model of a skel-
eton. An actual human skeleton would have been difficult to get and to carry to
class. Similarly, because most colleges and universities do not allow firearms on
campus, a drawing that shows the features of a gun is a much safer presentation
aid than a real gun or even a toy gun. If you need to show the movable parts of
a gun, perhaps a papier-mâché, plastic, or wood model would serve. Make sure,
however, that any model you use is large enough to be seen by all members
of your audience. When Brad brought his collection of miniature hand-carved
guitars to illustrate his talk on rock music, his tiny visuals didn’t add to the mes-
sage; they distracted from it.
People  At least since Ronald Reagan, U.S. presidents have used people as vi-
sual aids during their State of the Union addresses, relating a poignant story
and then asking the protagonist of the story, seated in the balcony, to stand and
be recognized. One speechwriter noted that presidents have learned to use this
strategy to especially good effect, finding it “a way of coming down from the
stage, as it were, and mingling with the crowd.”8
In classroom speeches, too, people can serve as presentation aids. Amelia, a
choreographer for the Ballet Folklorico Mexicano, wanted to illustrate an intri-
cate Latin folk dance, so she arranged to have one of the troupe’s dancers attend
her speech to demonstrate the dance. Using people to illustrate your message
can be tricky, however. Follow the tips in the How To box to help you avoid
difficulties.
Use People as Presentation Aids
•	 Choose models with care.  It is usually unwise to ask for spur-of-the-moment help from volun-
teers while you are delivering your speech. Instead, choose a trusted friend or colleague.
•	 Plan and practice.  Before your presentation, be sure that you fully inform your model about
what needs to be done. You should also rehearse your speech using your living presentation
aid.
•	 Time your model’s appearance.  It is distracting to have your support person stand beside you
doing nothing. If you don’t need the person to demonstrate something during your opening
remarks, allow the person to be seated in a convenient place. Then introduce him or her to
your audience when needed.
•	 Stay in control.  Remember that your presentation aids are always subordinate to your speech.
Do not allow your assistants to run away with the show. For example, don’t let your dancer
perform longer than necessary to illustrate your point about technique or permit your models
to prance about too provocatively while displaying your dress designs. And don’t allow your
buddy to throw you when you demonstrate the wrestling hold that made you the district wres-
tling champ.
How
To
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 294 11/18/14 11:27 AM
295
Types of Presentation Aids 14.2
You can also serve as your own presentation aid to demonstrate or illustrate
major points. If you are talking about tennis, you might bring your racquet to
class so that you can illustrate your superb backhand or simply show novices
the proper way to hold it. If you are a nurse or emergency medical technician
giving a talk about medical procedures, by all means wear your uniform to
establish your credibility.
Two-Dimensional Presentation Aids
The most common presentation aids are two-dimensional: drawings, pho-
tographs, maps, graphs, charts, flipcharts, and chalkboards. Although a few
presenters continue to use overhead transparencies, you’ll more than likely
­
incorporate these presentation aids into PowerPoint or other slides to illustrate
your message. As we discuss two-dimensional visual aids, we’ll offer general
suggestions both for using them in the old-fashioned way and for incorporat-
ing them into presentation software. A little later in the chapter, we’ll focus
­
exclusively on how to use computer-generated graphics.
Drawings  Drawings are popular and often-used presentation aids because
they are easy and inexpensive to make. Drawings can be tailored to your specific
needs. To illustrate the functions of the human brain, for example, one student
traced an outline of the brain and labeled it to indicate where brain functions are
located. Another student wanted to show the different sizes and shapes of leaves
of trees in the area, so she drew enlarged pictures of the leaves, using appropri-
ate shades of green.
You don’t have to be a master artist to develop effective drawings. As a rule,
large and simple line drawings are more effective for stage presentations than
are detailed images. If you have absolutely no faith in your artistic skill, you can
probably find a friend or relative who can help you to prepare a useful drawing,
or you may be able to use computer software to generate simple line drawings.
Photographs  Photographs can be used to show objects or places that can-
not be illustrated with drawings or that an audience cannot view directly. The
problem with printed photos, however, is that they are usually too small to be
seen clearly from a distance. If your listeners occupy only two or three rows, it
might be possible to hold a photograph close enough for them to see a key fea-
ture of the picture or to display a photo on a computer tablet such as an iPad.
Passing a photograph among your listeners is not a good idea either; it creates
competition for your audience’s attention.
The only way to be sure that a photograph will be effective as a presentation
aid for a large audience is to enlarge it, either as a big print or through electronic
projection. If you’re using nondigital images, you can scan them and have them
enlarged. Or, if you’re using presentation software such as PowerPoint, you
can import your photos into PowerPoint slides to make them large enough for
everyone to see.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 295 11/18/14 11:27 AM
296 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.2
Twenty years ago, in the era BP (Before PowerPoint), public speakers who
wanted to illustrate a talk with photos used 36-millimeter slides projected with a
slide projector. Today slides are rarely used because computer-generated images
are much easier to work with.
Maps  Most maps are designed to be read from a distance of no more than two
feet. As with photographs, the details on most maps won’t be visible to your au-
dience. You could use a large map, however, to show general features of an area.
Or you can use a magnified version of your map. Certain copiers can enlarge
images as much as 200 percent. It is possible, using a color copier, to enlarge a
standard map of Europe enough for listeners in the last row to see the general
features of the continent. Using a dark marker, one speaker highlighted the bor-
ders on a map of Europe to indicate the countries she had visited the previous
summer (see Figure 14.1). She used a red marker to show the general path of
her journey. You can also search online for “public domain” maps that you can
download without violating copyright laws.
Graphs A graph is a pictorial representation of statistical data in an easy-to-
understand format. Most graphs that are used in speeches are prepared by using
either Excel or Word and then displayed as computer-generated slides.
Why use a graph? Seeing relationships among numbers is better than just
hearing statistics. Statistics are abstract summaries of many examples. Most
listeners find that graphs help make the data more concrete and easier to un-
derstand. Yet research also suggests that in addition to presenting information
in a graph, it’s important to talk about the information presented.9 Graphs are
particularly effective in showing overall trends and relationships among data.
MONT-
ENEGRO
SERBIA
KOSOVO
ALABANIA
Figure 14.1 A map can be an effective visual aid, especially if the
speaker personalizes it by highlighting the relevant information.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 296 11/18/14 11:27 AM
297
Types of Presentation Aids 14.2
By watching news programs, hearing reports, and seeing presentations, you
have undoubtedly seen the four most common types of graphs: bar graphs, pie
graphs, line graphs, and picture graphs.
•	 Bar graphs. A bar graph consists of flat areas—bars—of various lengths
to represent information. The bar graph in Figure 14.2 clearly shows the
growth rates in the number of smartphone users. It would be more difficult
to illustrate your point with words and numbers alone. A graph helps your
listeners quickly see comparisons.
•	 Pie graphs. A pie graph shows the individual shares of a whole. The pie
graph in Figure 14.3 shows the top Internet search providers. Pie graphs are
especially useful in helping your listeners to see quickly how data are dis-
tributed in a given category or area.
•	 Line graphs. Line graphs show relationships between two or more variables.
Like bar graphs, line graphs organize statistical data to show overall trends
(Figure 14.4). A line graph can cover a greater span of time or numbers than
a bar graph can without looking cluttered or confusing. As with other types
of presentation aids, a simple line graph communicates better than a clut-
tered one.
•	 Picture graphs. In place of either a line graph or a bar graph, you can use
pictures, or symbols, to supplement the data you are summarizing (Figure
14.5). A picture graph looks somewhat less formal and less intimidating than
other kinds of graphs. One of the advantages of picture graphs is that they
use few words or labels, which makes them easier for your audience to read.
There are online sources that can help you create your own picture graphs.
2009
App
customer
base
(millions)
2010 2011 2012 2013
700
800
900
500
300
100
0
1000
600
400
200
Figure 14.2  Bar graphs can help make statistical information clearly and
immediately visible to your audience.
Source: Data from CBS News, “Number of Smartphone Users Tops 1 Billion” (2013) http://www
.cbsnews.cm/8301-205_165-57534583/study-number-of-smartphone-users-tops-1-billion
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 297 11/18/14 11:27 AM
298 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.2
Charts A chart summarizes and presents a great deal of information in
a small amount of space. The tables throughout this text are charts. Charts
have several advantages: They are easy to use, reuse, and enlarge. They can
also be displayed in a variety of ways, such as on a flipchart, a poster, or a
Google sites
Microsoft sites
Yahoo! sites
Ask Network
AOL, Inc.
Top Preferred Internet Search Engines,
Market Share in 2012
67%
16%
12%
3%
2%
Figure 14.3 A pie graph shows the percentage of a
whole contributed by each part.
Source: Data from comScore http://www.comscore.com/Insights/
Press_Releases/2012/12/comScore_Releases_November_2012_U.S._
Search_Engine_Rankings
2009 2010 2011
US Unemployment Rates
2012 2013
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
Figure 14.4  Line graphs show relationships between two or more variables.
Source: United States Bureau of Labor Statistics http://data.bls.gov/pdq/SurveyOutputServlet?request_
action=wh&graph_name=LN_cpsbref3
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 298 11/18/14 11:27 AM
299
Types of Presentation Aids 14.2
computer-developed slide. As important with all other presentation aids, charts
must be simple. Do not try to put too much information on one chart.
The key to developing effective charts is to prepare the lettering of the words
and phrases you use very carefully. If the chart contains too much information,
audience members may feel it is too complicated to understand and ignore it. If
your chart looks at all cramped or crowded, divide the information into several
charts and display each as needed. Make sure your letters are large enough to be
seen clearly in the back row. Use simple words or phrases, and eliminate unnec-
essary words. Do not handwrite the chart; given the availability of computers, a
hand-lettered chart can seem unprofessional.
Flipcharts  A flipchart consists of a large pad of paper resting on an easel.
Flipcharts are sometimes used in business presentations and training sessions,
although the prevalence of computer graphics software has reduced their use
in corporate presentations. You can either prepare your visual aids before your
speech or draw on the paper while speaking. Flipcharts are easy to use. During
your presentation, you need only flip the page to reveal your next visual. Flip-
charts are best used when you have brief information to display or when you
want to summarize comments from audience members during a presentation.
Most experienced flipchart users recommend that you use lined paper to
keep your words and drawings neat and well organized. Another suggestion is
to pencil in speaking notes on the chart that only you can see. Brief notes on a
flipchart are less cumbersome to use than notes on cards or a clipboard.
Average Daily Coffee Cups Consumed Per Person Per Day
Finland
Norway
Netherlands
United States
Figure 14.5 Adding visual symbols, such as those in this
picture graph, can help your audience to maintain interest and
understand complex information.
Source: The eLearning Coach, “How to Make Numbers Interesting” (2013)
http://theelearningcoach.com/media/graphics/make-numbers-interesting. Used
with permission by Connie Malamed.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 299 11/18/14 11:27 AM
300 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.2
Chalkboards And Whiteboards  Chalkboards and whiteboards offer
several advantages as ways to provide visual support for spoken words: They
are widespread; you can find a chalkboard or whiteboard in most classrooms
and boardrooms. They are inexpensive, simple to use, and low-tech, so you
don’t need to worry about extension cords or special training. They lend them-
selves to a variety of content; it’s easy to sketch a simple graph, diagram, or
map, or to jot a few words on the board.
Nonetheless, many public-speaking teachers discourage overuse of them.
Why? When you write on the board, you have your back to your audience; you
do not have eye contact! Some speakers try to avoid that problem by writing on
the board before their speech starts, but then listeners often look at the visual
rather than listening to the introductory remarks. Moreover, chalkboards and
whiteboards are probably the least novel presentation aids, so they are not par-
ticularly effective at getting or holding audience attention.
Use a board only for brief phrases or for very simple line diagrams that can be
drawn in just a few seconds. It is usually better to prepare a chart, graph, or drawing
on a poster or an overhead transparency than to use a chalkboard or whiteboard.
Computer-Generated Presentation Aids
Richard had worked hard on his presentation to the finance committee. He
had prepared an impressive-looking poster, distributed a handout of his key
conclusions, and rehearsed his speech so that he had a well-polished delivery.
But as he sat down after concluding his speech, certain he had dazzled his lis-
teners, a colleague poked him and asked, “Why didn’t you use PowerPoint or
Prezi slides?”
Popular Presentation Software  Most audiences, especially those in
the corporate world, expect a speaker to use computer-generated presentation
aids. The most popular presentation software, PowerPoint, helps you create and
present images, photos, words, charts, and graphs. Figure 14.6 shows how clip
art can be used to create polished PowerPoint slides.
Prezi is another increasingly popular presentation software program that
is cloud-based—the information is stored in an Internet “cloud” rather than
on your own computer. Prezi has many features similar to PowerPoint, but it
also has features that let you zoom in and out to help you focus your audience’s
­
attention (although overuse of this feature can be nauseatingly distracting!).
Prezi also has a feature that lets you look at all of your slides at once, giving you
more control to select images to adapt to your audience. So rather than predeter-
mining the precise order of your slides, you can more readily adapt your presen-
tation to your audience while you are speaking.
Keynote, another popular presentation software, was developed for
­AppleTM computers and devices, although it can be transferred for use in PC
computers. Like other graphics programs, it permits users to easily maintain
consistency in fonts and colors. Some people especially like its sleek, contempo-
rary appearance.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 300 11/18/14 11:27 AM
301
Types of Presentation Aids 14.2
Although PowerPoint, Prezi, and Keynote can be overused and, like any
presentation aid, can distract from your message if used improperly, they none-
theless open up professional-looking possibilities for illustrating your speech.
Creating Effective Computer-Generated Presentation
Aids  You don’t have to be a professional artist to develop attractive images.
That’s the key advantage of using computer-generated graphics—virtually any-
one can use them to craft professional-looking images. Since most students learn
to use presentation software in school, you will no doubt be familiar with the
basic elements of developing a computer-generated image. In addition to learn-
ing the mechanics of the software program, keep in mind the following tips and
those summarized in Table 14.1 when using computer-generated graphics.10
One of the biggest problems with using computer-generated images is that
a speaker might be tempted to shovel large amounts of information at ­
listeners
without regard for the listeners’ attention span. Research supports our now
­
familiar admonition that the audience should be foremost in your mind as you
develop visual images to support your verbal message.11 You can use the head-
ings of your slides to help your listeners follow your organization. Summarize
the essential point of each visual in the heading. Listeners should be able to
­
follow the key points of the story you tell by reading only the headings.12
Audiovisual Aids
You are undoubtedly familiar with media that combine images and sound to com-
municate ideas. Audiovisual aids do the same. With audiovisual aids, you combine
Make Your
Supporting Material
• concrete
• personal
• varied
Figure 14.6  Copyright-free clip art is readily available at many Web sites. It
can give a professional look to your visuals and memorably reinforce your verbal
messages.
Source: Shannon Kingston. Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ Photo: Donald
Sawvel/Shutterstock
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 301 11/18/14 11:27 AM
302 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.2
Figure 14.7  Here are several typefaces, grouped by font
type. Serif fonts are generally easiest for audiences to read.
We recommend using script and sans serif fonts sparingly and
decorative fonts only for dramatic impact.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
the power of visual rhetoric with a supporting audio rhetoric track. It’s now easy
to record video images and audio clips to support speech ideas; digital video cam-
eras are inexpensive, widely available, and a standard feature of smartphones. In
addition, you can also import sounds and music from DVDs or Internet sources.
Table 14.1  Develop Effective Computer-Generated Visuals
Make text simple •	 Use no more than seven lines of text on a single slide. Or even better, 	
use fewer words and an appropriate image.
•	 Use bullets.
•	 Use parallel structure when writing text. For example, start every bullet point with the same word.
•	 Use appropriate typefaces, or fonts, for your message. See Figure14.7.
Make sights and sounds
support your message
•	 Use few or no sound effects; you should be the soundtrack, not your computer.
•	 Use only images or video/audio clips that help to develop your central idea.
Make visuals unified •	 Use a common visual element on each slide.
•	 Use a common font.
•	 Use a similar background or style for each slide.
Choose colors carefully •	 Use red and orange to communicate warmth.
•	 Use green and blue to communicate calm coolness.
•	 Be cautious about using red and green together.
•	 Use a light background with darker text to catch attention.
Create your visuals
well in advance of your
presentation
•	 Use your time to integrate your verbal message with your visual message.
•	 Seek advice and assistance from others to help polish your visuals.
•	 Practice using your visuals when you rehearse your speech.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 302 11/18/14 11:27 AM
303
Types of Presentation Aids 14.2
Video Aids  Video images can sometimes make your point better than would
words alone. If, for example, you want to illustrate the frustration of not being
able to park on your campus, recording and showing a video of full parking lots
and harried commuters hunting for parking spots would help you make your
point. Or to convince your listeners to support a ban on thin plastic bags being
used in your community, show images of how the bags can be seen clinging to
fences and cluttering landfills.
As with other presentation aids, keep the focus on the speech rather than
the video. Before you decide to use a video image, think about whether or not it
will really enhance your speech. Short, well-selected clips are most likely to be
effective.
Showing a short clip from a movie or TV show may help you make your
point or provide an attention-catching opening or a memorable closing to your
talk. If you are using video from movies or TV to support your talk, you’ll
likely get the images from YouTube, other Internet sources, such as Hulu, or
commercially prerecorded digital video disks (DVDs). Movies and TV shows,
however, are not designed to be supporting material for a speech. Usually,
they are conceived as self-contained packages, and unless you show only
short excerpts, they can overwhelm your speech. Longer videos can exceed
your listeners’ attention spans and may detract from your live-and-in-person
presentation.
As we noted earlier, it can be helpful to incorporate video files (if you can
obtain them legally from your video source) into your own PowerPoint slides.
Building the video into a slide can give you more control over precisely what
clip you are showing as well as the visual context and timing when you play it.
For example, you could show printed lyrics at the same time that you show a
musician performing.
You can use a variety of devices and technologies to store your videos and
play them back during your speech:
•	 DVD player. You might wish to play part of a prerecorded movie or TV show
from a DVD, using your computer or a DVD player. DVDs have ­
several
­
advantages over the older last-century technology of videotape players. Not
only does a DVD have excellent picture quality, but also it can be started
and stopped with precision.
•	 Computers and other electronic devices. You can store and play your own
­
videos or clips from other sources on your computer, your smartphone,
a tablet computer such as an iPad, or your iPod or other MP3 player.
­
Unless the audience is very small, all of these options will require you to
hook your device to a monitor or a projection system. A 32-inch screen is
generally visible to an audience of 25 to 30 people. For a larger ­
audience,
you will need several TVs or monitors or a large projection TV system.
Make sure monitors are available and compatible with your device or
bring your own.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 303 11/18/14 11:27 AM
304 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.2
•	 The Internet. If the room in which you are delivering your speech has WiFi
or direct Internet access, you could skip storing your video and ­
instead
play the video directly from YouTube or another Internet source. You could
also retrieve your video or audio material from the “cloud”—computer
storage in a remote location. Having a cloud backup of your material can
enhance the security and ensure that your material will be there when
you need it. Playing video directly from the Internet or from cloud storage
does, ­
however, carry the risk of losing an Internet connection prior to or
during your speech. It will also involve having the technology to access the
­
Internet—either your own equipment or whatever is available in the room.
When using any of these technologies, you’ll want to practice using your
video and make sure all the equipment you need is available. Unless you’re us-
ing a wireless system, for example, you might need a cable to connect your stor-
age device to a monitor. We also recommend that, before you give your speech,
you do a technical run-through, ensuring that your video image will be ready
when you want it.
Audio Aids  Audio can be used to complement visual displays. As with
video, you can either create your own audio content or use prerecorded sources.
You also have a number of options for storage and playback. You might play a
few measures of Bach’s Toccata and Fugue in D Minor from your iPod—or even
live, on a portable electronic keyboard—to illustrate a point.
Used sparingly, sound can effectively establish a mood or support your
points. While showing PowerPoint slides of her recent Caribbean vacation,
one student used a recording of soft steel drum music as an introductory back-
ground for her talk. Another student played excerpts of taped interviews with
frustrated students who had difficulty figuring out the most recent changes in
how to apply for financial aid.
As with video, be sure to rehearse with and master any technology that is
needed for your audio aids, and don’t let your audio soundtrack overwhelm or
distract from your own words.
Quick Check
Types of Presentation Aids
•	 3-D aids: objects, models, people
•	 2-D aids: drawings, photos, slides, maps, graphs, charts, flipcharts,
chalkboards, whiteboards, overhead transparencies
•	 Computer-generated aids 
•	 Audiovisual aids: video, audio
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 304 11/18/14 11:27 AM
305
Guidelines for Developing Presentation Aids 14.3
Guidelines for Developing
Presentation Aids
14.3	 Identify guidelines for developing effective presentation aids.
A speech should be more than just what a speaker says with a few PowerPoint
slides or other visual aids added as an afterthought. Spend time carefully devel-
oping your visual rhetoric as well as your words. The following commonsense
and research-based strategies can help you prepare effective presentation aids
for your speeches.
Make Them Easy to See
Without a doubt, the most violated principle of using presentation aids in pub-
lic speaking is “Make it big!” Countless speeches have been accompanied by
a chart or graph with writing that is too small to read, a computer-generated
­
image that is not large enough to be legible, or a graph on a flipchart that simply
can’t be deciphered from the back row. If the only principle you carry away from
this chapter is to make your presentation aid large enough to be seen by all in
your audience, you will have gained more skill than a majority of speakers who
use presentation aides in speeches. Write big!
Keep Them Simple
Some students think that the visuals accompanying a speech must be as com-
plicated as a Broadway production, complete with lights and costumes. Resist
trying to make your visuals complicated. Indeed, any complexity is too much
complexity.
Simple presentation aids usually communicate best. Text should be limited
to key words or phrases. Simple images are better than overly detailed graphics.
Don’t cram too much information on one chart or computer slide. If you have
a lot of information, it is better to use two or three simple charts or slides than
to attempt to put all your words on one visual. Here’s an outline of an informa-
tive speech that uses simple visual aids (which could be displayed on charts or
as computer-generated graphics) to clearly communicate the ideas the speaker
wishes to convey.13
Topic:	 Standard editorial symbols
General purpose:	 To inform
Specific purpose:	
At the end of my speech, the audience should be
able to use and interpret ten standard symbols for
editorial changes in written material.
14.3
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 305 11/18/14 11:27 AM
306 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.3
I.	 The following seven editorial symbols are commonly used to change
­written text.
A.	 Use the “pigtail” symbol to delete a letter, a word, or a
phrase.
B.	 Use a caret (it looks like a housetop) to insert a space, a letter,
new text, or punctuation.
C.	 Use what look like two sideways parentheses to remove
unwanted space.
D.	 Use this squiggle line to transpose letters, words, or
phrases.
E.	 Draw three lines under letters to capitalize
them.
F.	 Draw a slash through letters to change them to
lowercase.
G.	 Write the word stet to undo previous editing
marks.
II.	 Three editorial symbols are used to rearrange the format of text.
A.	 Use brackets to add or remove indents or to correct the
­
alignment of text.
B.	 Use backward bracket marks around text that you want
centered on the page.
C.	 Use a symbol that looks like a backward p to mark the
­
beginning of a new paragraph.
After the speech, the speaker could give each audience member a one-page
handout summarizing these editorial markings.
Select the Right Presentation Aid
Because there are so many choices, you might wonder, “How do I decide which
presentation aid to use?” Here are some suggestions:
•	 Consider your audience. Factors such as audience size dictate the size of the
visual you select. If you have a large audience, do not choose a presenta-
tion aid unless everyone will be able to see it clearly. The age, interests,
and attitudes of your audience also affect your selection of audiovisual
support.
•	 Consider your speech objective. Don’t select a presentation aid until you have
decided on the purpose of your speech.
•	 Consider your own skill and experience. Use only equipment with which you
are comfortable or have had practical experience.
a
B
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 306 11/18/14 11:27 AM
307
Guidelines for Using Presentation Aids 14.4
•	 Consider the room in which you will speak. If the room has large windows with
no shades and no other way to dim the lights, do not consider using visuals
that require a darkened room.
Do Not Use Dangerous or Illegal Presentation Aids
Earlier, we described a speech in which the speaker accidentally caused an
­
archery bow to fly over the heads of his startled audience. Not only did he lose
credibility because he was unable to string the bow successfully, but he also
­
endangered his audience by turning his presentation aid into a flying missile.
Dangerous or illegal presentation aids may either shock your audience or physi-
cally endanger them. Such aids will also detract from your message. They are
never worth the risk of a ruined speech or an injured audience member. If your
speech seems to call for a dangerous or illegal object or substance, substitute a
picture, a chart, or some other representation device.
Quick Check
Guidelines for Developing Presentation Aids
•	 Make them big.
•	 Keep them simple.
•	 Match them to your audience, objectives, skills, and setting.
•	 Keep them safe and legal.
Guidelines for Using Presentation
Aids
14.4	 Identify guidelines for effectively using presentation aids.
Now that we have offered strategies for developing effective presentation aids,
here are tips for using them for maximum audience impact.
Rehearse with Your Presentation Aids
Jane nervously approached her speech teacher ten minutes before class. She
wondered whether class could start immediately, because her presentation aid
was melting. She had planned to explain how to get various stains out of cloth-
ing, and her first demonstration would show how to remove chewing gum. But
she had forgotten the gum, so she had to ask for a volunteer from the audience
to spit out his gum so that she could use it in her demonstration. The ice she had
brought to rub on the sticky gum had by this time melted. All she could do was
14.4
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 307 11/18/14 11:27 AM
308 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.4
dribble some lukewarm water on the gummed-up cloth in a valiant but unsuc-
cessful effort to demonstrate her cleaning method. It didn’t work. To make mat-
ters worse, when she tried to set her poster in the chalkboard tray, it kept falling
to the floor. She ended up embarrassed and on the edge of tears. It was obvious
that she had not rehearsed with her presentation aids.
Your appearance before your audience should not be the first time you de-
liver your speech while holding up your chart, turning on the overhead projec-
tor, operating the remote control to show your slides, clicking on your YouTube
video, or using the flipchart. Practice with your presentation aids until you feel
at ease with them.
Make Eye Contact with Your Audience, Not with
Your Presentation Aids
You might be tempted to talk to your presentation aid rather than to your audience.
Your focus, however, should remain on your audience. You will need to glance at
your visual to make sure that it isn’t upside down and that it is the proper one. But
do not face it while giving your talk. Keep looking your audience in the eyes.
Explain Your Presentation Aids
Some speakers believe that they need not explain a presentation aid; they think
it’s enough just to show it to their audience. Resist this approach. When you
exhibit your chart showing the overall decline in the stock market, tell your au-
dience what point you are trying to make. Visual support performs the same
function as verbal support: It helps you communicate an idea. Make sure that
your audience knows what that idea is. Don’t just unceremoniously announce,
“Here are the recent statistics on birth rates in the United States” and hold up
your visual without further explanation. Tell the audience how to interpret the
data. Always set your visuals in a verbal context.
Do Not Pass Objects among Members of Your
Audience
You realize that your marble collection will be too small to see, so you decide
to pass some of your most stunning marbles around while you talk. Bad idea.
While you are excitedly describing some of your cat’s-eye marbles, you have
provided a distraction for your audience. People will be more interested in see-
ing and touching your marbles than in hearing you talk about them.
What can you do when your object is too small to see without passing it
around? If no other speaker follows your speech, you can invite audience mem-
bers to come up and see your object when your speech is over. If your audience
is only two or three rows deep, you can even hold up the object and move in
close to the audience to show it while you maintain control. Or you can use your
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 308 11/18/14 11:27 AM
309
Guidelines for Using Presentation Aids 14.4
phone to take photos of the object, embed the photos in presentation software,
and project the images at a size even a large audience can see.
Use Animals with Caution
Most actors are unwilling to work with animals—and for good reason. At best,
they may steal the show. And most often, they are unpredictable. You may think
you have the smartest, best-trained dog in the world, but you really do not know
how your dog will react to a strange environment and an unfamiliar audience.
The risk of having an animal detract from your speech may be too great to make
planning a speech around one worthwhile.
A zealous student at a midwestern university a few years ago decided to
give a speech on cattle. What better presentation aid, he thought, than a cow?
He brought the cow to campus and led her up several flights of stairs to his
classroom. The speech in fact went well. But the student had neglected to con-
sider one significant problem: Cows will go upstairs but not down them. (The
cow had to be hoisted out a window.) These and other examples emphasize our
point: Use animals with care, if at all.
Use Handouts Effectively
Many speech instructors believe that you should not distribute handouts during a
speech. Handing out papers in the middle of your presentation will only distract
your audience. However, audiences in business and other types of organizations
will often expect a summary of your key ideas in written form or a printout of
your PowerPoint or Prezi slides. If you do find it necessary to use written mate-
rial to reinforce your presentation, keep the following suggestions in mind:
•	 Don’t distribute your handout during the presentation unless your listeners must
refer to the material while you’re talking about it. Do not distribute handouts
that have only marginal relevance to your verbal message. They will defeat
your purpose.
•	 Control listeners’ attention. If you do distribute a handout and you see that
your listeners are giving the written material more attention than they are
giving you, tell them where in the handout you want them to focus. For
example, you could say, “I see that many of you are interested in the second
and third pages of the report. I’ll discuss those items in just a few moments.
I’d like to talk about a few examples before we get to page 2.”
•	 After distributing your handouts, tell audience members to keep the material face
down until you’re ready to talk about the material. This will help listeners resist
the temptation to peek at your handout instead of keeping their focus on
you and your message.
•	 Clearly number the pages on your handout material. This will make it easy for
you to direct audience members to specific pages in your handouts.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 309 11/18/14 11:27 AM
310 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.4
•	 Consider preparing images of each page to project on a computer-prepared slide.
You’ll be able to display the specific page you’re talking about; you can also
quickly point to the paragraph or chart on the page you want them to ­
focus
on. Listeners will be able to see what page you’re on if they miss your ­
verbal
announcement. It’s not a good idea, however, to economize by only display-
ing detailed material and not providing handouts. The print will be too
small to be seen clearly.
•	 If your listeners do not need the information in your handouts during your pre-
sentation, tell them that you will distribute a summary of the key ideas at the end
of your talk. Your handout could include a copy of all computer-generated
slides or it might summarize the specific action you want your audience to
take, as well as distill the key information you have discussed.
Time the Use of Visuals to Control Your Audience’s
Attention
Jessica was extremely proud of the huge replica of the human mouth that she
had constructed to illustrate her talk on the proper way to brush one’s teeth. It
stood over two feet tall and was painted pink and white. It was a true work of
art. As she began her speech, she set her mouth model in full view of the audi-
ence. She opened her speech with a brief history of dentistry in America. But her
listeners never heard a word: They were fascinated by the model. Jessica would
have done better to cover her presentation aid with a cloth and then reveal it
dramatically when she wanted to illustrate proper tooth brushing.
A skillful speaker knows when to show a supporting visual and when to
put it away. It’s not wise to begin your speech with all your charts, graphs, and
slides in full view unless you are going to refer to them in your opening re-
marks. Time the display of your visuals to coincide with your discussion of the
information contained in them. Here are a few more suggestions for timing your
presentation aids:
•	 If possible, use a remote-control device to advance the PowerPoint images so
that you do not have to stay anchored near the computer to advance each
slide.
•	 Mute or otherwise remove from the audience’s view computer images when you
are making a point or telling a story not related to a visual image or word
summary. Many speakers build blank slides into their presentations for this
purpose. You don’t want an image or bulleted list of words unrelated to
your message to compete for your listeners’ attention. Removing them from
view returns the audience’s focus to you.
•	 Consider asking someone to help you hold your presentation aid or turn the
pages of your flipchart. Make sure you rehearse with your assistant so that all
goes smoothly during your presentation.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 310 11/18/14 11:27 AM
311
Guidelines for Using Presentation Aids 14.4
Use Technology Effectively
You may be tempted to use some of the newer technologies we have
­
described because of their novelty rather than their value in helping you
communicate your message. Some novice speakers will overuse presentation
aids simply ­
because they can quickly produce eye-catching visuals. Resist
this temptation.
Don’t assume that the hardware and software you need will be available in
the room where you are speaking. Be sure to find out what kinds of technology
exist.
Even if you have asked and you are appropriately prepared on the basis of
the information you were given, have a backup plan. You might want to bring
your own laptop or a backup flash drive or other device for storing your slides.
Another strategy is to email your computer slides to yourself, or back up the
files to a cloud storage site, so that you can retrieve them as a backup.
In spite of the potential problems that using technology may present, inno-
vations such as YouTube and computer images are destined to play a growing
role in public speaking. In this technology- and image-dependent culture, listen-
ers expect technology to support a message. Nonetheless, when using technol-
ogy, keep the basic principles we’ve offered in mind: Make it big, integrate the
words and images into your talk, and properly time your visuals to coincide
with your message content. And don’t forget to rehearse using the same technol-
ogy you will use during your talk.
Remember Murphy’s Law
According to Murphy’s Law, if something can go wrong, it will. When you use
presentation aids, you increase the chances that problems or snags will develop
when you present your speech. The chart might fall off the easel, you might
not find the chalk, or the computer in the room may not be compatible with
your software. We are not saying that you should be a pessimist but that you
should have backup supplies and an alternative plan in case your original plans
go awry.
If something doesn’t go as you planned, do your best to keep your speech
on track. If the chart falls over, simply pick it up and keep talking; don’t offer
lengthy apologies. If you can’t find the chalk, ask a friend to go on a chalk hunt
in another room. No computer-generated slides as you had planned? Have all
key pieces of information in your notes rather than relying on the computer
slides to be your speech notes. A thorough rehearsal, a double-check of your
equipment, backup images, and extra supplies such as extension cords and
masking tape can help to repeal Murphy’s Law.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 311 11/18/14 11:27 AM
312 Designing and Using Presentation Aids
14.4
Quick Check
Guidelines for Using Presentation Aids
•	 Prepare carefully and practice with aids.
•	 Maintain eye contact with audience.
•	 Talk about the information or image on the aid.
•	 Don’t pass around objects.
•	 Be careful with animals.
•	 Use handouts and technology effectively.
•	 Control listeners’ attention.
•	 Remember Murphy’s Law.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 312 11/18/14 11:27 AM
313
Chapter 14  study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
14.1	 Discuss five ways in which presentation aids help communicate ideas
to an audience.
Presentation aids are tools that help you communicate your ideas more dramati-
cally than words alone can. They help improve listeners’ understanding and rec-
ollection of your ideas. They can also help you communicate the organization of
your ideas, gain and maintain the audience’s attention, and illustrate a sequence
of events or procedures.
Key Terms
Presentation aid
Visual rhetoric
14.2	 Describe the types of presentation aids and identify tips for using them
effectively.
Three-dimensional presentation aids include objects, models, and people. Two-
dimensional presentation aids include drawings, photographs, slides, maps,
graphs, charts, flipcharts, and chalkboards. Software graphics and presentation
packages can be used to produce many presentation aids inexpensively and ef-
ficiently. Audiovisual aids include video clips and audio clips or performances
that help communicate ideas to your listeners.
Key Terms
Model
Graph
Bar graph
Pie graph
Line graph
Picture graph
Chart
Clip art
Font
14.3	 Identify guidelines for developing effective presentation aids.
When you prepare your presentation aids, make sure your visuals are simple
and large enough to be seen clearly by all of your listeners. Adapt your presenta-
tion aids to your audience, the speaking environment, and the objectives of your
speech. Prepare your visuals well in advance, and make sure they are not illegal
or dangerous to use.
14.4	 Identify guidelines for effectively using presentation aids.
As you present your speech, remember to look at your audience, not at your
presentation aid; talk about your visual, don’t just show it; avoid passing objects
among your audience; use handouts to reinforce the main points in your speech;
time your visuals carefully; and be sure to have backup supplies and a contin-
gency plan.
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 313 11/18/14 11:27 AM
314 Chapter 14  study guide
Think about These Questions
•	 Nikki plans to give a talk to the Rotary Club in an effort to encourage the
club members to support a local bond issue for a new library. She wants to
make sure they understand how cramped and inadequate the current li-
brary is. What type of visual support could she use to make her point?
•	 Professor Chou uses only the chalkboard to illustrate her anthropology lec-
tures and then only occasionally writes a word or two. What other types of
visual or auditory aids could Professor Chou use in teaching?
•	 Ceally wants to educate his college classmates about the increased use of
profanity in contemporary music. He would like to play sound clips of
some of the most offensive lyrics to illustrate his point. Would you advise
Ceally to play these songs, even though doing so might offend members of
the audience?
M14_BEEB3981_05_SE_C14_289-314.indd 314 11/18/14 11:27 AM
Part 6
Types of Speeches
Chapter 15	 Speaking to Inform
Chapter 16	 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
Chapter 17	 Using Persuasive Strategies
Chapter 18	 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Types
of
Speeches
Chapters
15-18
6
M15A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB6.indd 1 11/18/14 9:24 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Chapter 15  Speaking to Inform
1.	 Explain in your own words the three goals of an informative speech.
2.	 List and describe in your own words four ways to help your listeners remember infor-
mation you present.
3.	 Hillary Webster, M.D., will be addressing a medical convention of other physicians to
discuss the weight-loss technique she has recently used successfully with her patients.
What is one piece of advice you would give to help her present an effective informative
talk?
Chapter 16  Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
1.	 List the four goals of persuasion and give your own example of each one.
2.	 Is it ethical to develop a persuasive message that supports an attitude or belief with
which you personally disagree? Explain your answer.
Chapter 17  Using Persuasive Strategies
1.	 List the tips for using emotion to persuade given in this chapter and include an example
or description of each one in your own words.
2.	 Josh is speaking to his neighborhood association, attempting to persuade his neighbors
to organize a crime-watch program. Suggest one strategy Josh can use to (1) establish his
credibility, (2) use logic and reasoning to persuade the neighbors, or (3) use emotion in
his persuasive message.
Chapter 18  Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
1.	 List the nine types of ceremonial speeches described in this chapter and give at least one
example of a speech of each type, preferably a speech you heard (or delivered) yourself.
2.	 Several Web sites offer eulogy writing services or prewritten generic eulogies, such
as a eulogy “for a grandmother,” for around $30 to $40. If you were asked to deliver a
eulogy, would it be ethical to buy such a speech? Explain your answer.
Types
of
Speeches
Chapters
15-18
6
M15A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB6.indd 2 11/18/14 9:24 PM
315
Chapter 15
Speaking to
Inform
“Not only is there
an art in knowing
a thing, but also
a certain art in
teaching it.”
—Cicero
	15.1	Goals of Informative Speeches
	15.2	Types of Informative Speeches
Speeches about Objects
Speeches about Procedures
Speeches about People
Speeches about Events
Speeches about Ideas
	15.3	Strategies to Enhance Audience
Understanding
Speak with Clarity
Use Principles and Techniques of
Adult Learning
Clarify Unfamiliar Ideas or
Complex Processes
Appeal to a Variety of Learning
Styles
Outline
(continued)
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 315 11/13/14 12:44 PM
316 Speaking to Inform
15
Learning Objectives
	15.1	List the three major goals of informative speeches.
	15.2	Describe five different types of informative speeches.
	15.3	Effectively and appropriately use four strategies to enhance
audience understanding.
	15.4	Effectively and appropriately use three strategies to maintain
audience interest.
	15.5	Effectively and appropriately use four strategies to enhance
audience recall of information presented in an informative speech.
	15.6	Develop an audience-centered informative speech.
As you participate in your company’s management training classes, the group
facilitator turns to you and asks you to summarize your team’s discussion about
the importance of leadership.
Your sociology professor requires each student to give an oral report
describing the latest findings from the U.S. census.
At the conclusion of your weekly staff meeting via Skype, your boss asks
you to develop a brief oral report summarizing the new product you and your
team are developing.
In each of these situations, your task is to give information to someone. Con-
veying information to others is a useful skill in most walks of life. You may find
that informing others will be an important part of your job, your volunteer work,
	15.4	Strategies to Maintain Audience
Interest
Motivate Your Audience to Listen
to You
Tell a Story
Present Information That Relates to
Your Listeners
Use the Unexpected
	15.5	Strategies to Enhance Audience Recall
Build in Redundancy
Make Your Key Ideas Short and
Simple
Pace Your Information Flow
Reinforce Key Ideas
	15.6	Developing an Audience-Centered
Informative Speech
Consider Your Audience
Select and Narrow Your
Informative Topic
Determine Your Informative
Purpose
Develop Your Central Idea
Generate Your Main Ideas
Gather Your Supporting Material
Organize Your Speech
Rehearse Your Presentation
Deliver Your Speech
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 316 11/13/14 12:44 PM
317
Goals of Informative Speeches 15.1
or your activities with social groups. Whether you are having spontaneous con-
versation or delivering a rehearsed speech, your speaking purpose is often to
inform or teach someone something you know. One survey of both speech teach-
ers and students who had taken a speech course found that the single most impor-
tant skill taught in a public-speaking class is how to give an informative speech.1
In this chapter, we will suggest ways to build on your experience and enhance
your skill in informing others. First, we will summarize the goals of informa-
tive speaking and identify different types of informative speeches. Next, we’ll
provide suggestions for achieving your informative-speaking goals: enhancing
understanding, maintaining interest, and improving listener recall. Finally, we’ll
review the audience-centered model of public speaking to help you plan and
present your informative message.
Goals of Informative Speeches
15.1	 List the three major goals of informative speeches.
A speech to inform shares information with others to enhance their knowledge
or understanding of the information, concepts, and ideas you present. When
you inform someone, you assume the role of a teacher by defining, illustrating,
clarifying, or elaborating on a topic. You’re not trying to persuade listeners by
asking them to change their behavior. You are giving them information that is
useful or interesting.
When you inform, you’re typically attempting to achieve three goals:
•	 You speak to enhancing understanding. Understanding occurs when a listener
accurately interprets the intended meaning of a message.
•	 You speak to maintain interest. You may have carefully selected words, exam-
ples, and illustrations that your listeners would understand, but if you lis-
teners become bored and do not focus on your message, you won’t achieve
your informative-speaking goal.
•	 You speak to be remembered. In the chapter on listening, we noted that one
day after hearing a presentation, most listeners remember only about half of
what they were told. Two days after the presentation, they recall only about
25 percent. Your job as an informative speaker is to improve on those statistics.
15.1
Quick Check
Goals of Informative Speeches
•	 Enhance understanding
•	 Gain and maintain interest
•	 Ensure that listeners can remember what was said
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 317 11/13/14 12:44 PM
318 Speaking to Inform
15.2
Types of Informative Speeches
15.2	 Describe five different types of informative speeches.
Informative speeches can be classified according to the subject areas they cover.
In many informative presentations you will deliver, your topic will be provided
for you, or the nature of the specific speaking opportunity will dictate what you
talk about. If, for example, you’re updating your boss about a project your work
team has been developing, you need not wrack your brain for a speech topic.
But if you have an invitation (or assignment) to give an informative speech and
the topic choice is up to you, you might need help in selecting a topic and devel-
oping your purpose. Understanding the different types of informative speeches
can give you good ideas for speech topics.
Classifying the types of informative speeches you can give can also help you
decide how to organize your message. As you will see in the following discus-
sion, the demands of your topic and purpose often dictate a structure for your
speech. As you look at these suggestions about structure, however, remember
that good organization is only one factor in your audience’s ability to process
your message. After discussing types of informative speeches, we will offer
specific techniques to help your audience understand, maintain interest in, and
remember your message.
Speeches about Objects
A speech about an object might be about anything tangible—anything that you
can see or touch. You may or may not show the actual object to your ­
audience
while you are talking about it. (Chapter 14 suggests ways to use objects as
­
presentation aids to illustrate your ideas.) Almost any kind of object could form
the basis of an interesting speech:
Something from your own collection (for example, baskets, comic books,
antiques, baseball cards)
Sports cars
Cellos
Smartphones
Digital video cameras
World War II Memorial
Toys
Antique Fiestaware
English Staffordshire dogs
The time limit for your speech will determine the amount of detail you can
share with your listeners. Even in a 30- to 45-minute presentation, you cannot
15.2
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 318 11/13/14 12:44 PM
319
Types of Informative Speeches 15.2
talk about every aspect of any of the objects listed. You will need to focus on a
specific purpose. Here’s a sample outline for a speech about an object:
TOPIC: 	 Dead Sea Scrolls
GENERAL PURPOSE: 	 To inform
SPECIFIC PURPOSE: 	
At the end of my speech, the audience should be
able to describe how the Dead Sea Scrolls were
found, why they are important to society, and
the key content of the ancient manuscripts.
I.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls were found by accident.
A.	 The  scrolls were found in caves near the Dead Sea.
B.	 The scrolls were first discovered by a shepherd in 1947.
C.	 In the late 1940s and early 1950s, archaeologists and Bedouins found
ten caves that contained Dead Sea Scrolls.
II.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls are important to society.
A.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls are the oldest known manuscripts of any
books of the Bible.
B.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls give us a look at Jewish life in Palestine over
2,000 years ago.
III.	 The content of the Dead Sea Scrolls gives us a glimpse of the past.
A.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls include all the books of the Old Testament
except the book of Esther.
B.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls include fragments of the Septuagint, the earli-
est Greek translation of the Old Testament.
C.	 The Dead Sea Scrolls include a collection of hymns used by the
inhabitants of the Qumran Valley.
Speeches about objects may be organized topically, chronologically, or
spatially. The speech about the Dead Sea Scrolls is organized topically. It could,
however, be revised and organized chronologically. The first major idea could
be Jewish life in Palestine two thousand years ago. The second point could
present information about how the scrolls were found in the 1940s and 1950s.
The final major idea could be the construction in the 1960s of the museum in
Jerusalem that houses the famous scrolls. Or the speech could be organized
spatially, describing the physical layout of the caves in which the scrolls were
found.
Speeches about Procedures
A speech about a procedure discusses how something works (for example, the
human circulatory system) or describes a process that produces a particular out-
come (for example, how grapes become wine). At the close of such a speech,
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 319 11/13/14 12:44 PM
320 Speaking to Inform
15.2
your audience should be able to describe, understand, or perform the procedure
you have described. Here are some examples of procedures that could be the
subjects of effective informative presentations:
How state laws are made
How the U.S. patent system works
How an e-book reader works
How to refinish furniture
How to write a resume
How to plant an organic garden
How to select a graduate school
Notice that all these examples start with the word how. A speech about a
procedure usually focuses on how a process is completed or how something can
be accomplished. Speeches about procedures are often presented in workshops
or other training situations in which people learn skills.
Anita, describing how to develop a new training curriculum in teamwork
skills, used an organizational strategy that grouped some of her steps like
this:
I.	 Conduct a needs assessment of your department.
A.	 Identify the method of assessing department needs.
1.	 Consider using questionnaires.
2.	 Consider using interviews.
3.	 Consider using focus groups.
B.	 Implement the needs assessment.
II.	 Identify the topics that should be presented in the training.
A.	 Specify topics that all members of the department need.
B.	 Specify topics that only some members of the department need.
III.	 Write training objectives.
A.	 Write objectives that are measurable.
B.	 Write objectives that are specific.
C.	 Write objectives that are attainable.
IV.	 Develop lesson plans for the training.
A.	 Identify the training methods you will use.
B.	 Identify the materials you will need.
Many speeches about procedures include visual aids (see Chapter 14).
Whether you are teaching people how to hang wallpaper or how to give a
speech, showing them how to do something is almost always more effective
than just telling them how to do it.
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 320 11/13/14 12:44 PM
321
Types of Informative Speeches 15.2
Speeches about People
A biographical speech could be about someone famous or about someone you
know personally. Most of us enjoy hearing about the lives of real people, famous
or not, living or dead, who had some special quality. The key to presenting an
effective biographical speech is to be selective: Don’t try to cover every detail of
your subject’s life. Relate the key elements in the person’s career, personality, or
other significant life features so that you are building to a particular point rather
than just reciting facts about an individual. Perhaps your grandfather was known
for his generosity, for example. Mention some notable examples of his philan-
thropy. If you are talking about a well-known personality, pick information or a
period that is not widely known, such as the person’s private hobby or childhood.
One speaker gave a memorable speech about his neighbor:
To enter Hazel’s house is to enter a combination greenhouse and zoo.
Plants are everywhere; it looks and feels like a tropical jungle. Her home
is always warm and humid. Her dog Peppy, her cat Bones, a bird named
Elmer, and a fish called Frank can be seen through the philodendron,
ferns, and pansies. While Hazel loves her plants and animals, she loves
people even more. Her finest hours are spent serving coffee and home-
made chocolate pie to her friends and neighbors, playing Uno with
family until late in the evening, and just visiting about the good old
days. Hazel is one of a kind.
Note how the speech captures Hazel’s personality and charm. Speeches
about people should give your listeners the feeling that the person is a unique,
authentic individual.
One way to talk about a person’s life is in chronological order: birth, school,
career, marriage, achievements, death. However, if you are interested in present-
ing a specific theme, such as “Winston Churchill, master of English prose,” you
might decide instead to organize key experiences topically. First, you would
discuss Churchill’s achievements as a brilliant orator whose words defied
Germany in 1940; you might then trace the origins of his skill to his work as a
cub reporter in South Africa during the 1899–1902 Boer War.
Speeches about Events
Where were you on September 11, 2001? Even though you might have been
in elementary school, chances are that you clearly remember where you were
and what you were doing on that and other similarly fateful days. Major events
punctuate our lives and mark the passage of time. A major event can form the
basis of a fascinating informative speech. You can choose to talk about either an
event that you have witnessed or one that you have researched.
Make the Event Come Alive  Your goal is to describe the event in con-
crete, tangible terms and to bring the experience to life for your audience. Were
you living in New Jersey when Hurricane Sandy struck? Have you witnessed
the inauguration of a president, governor, or senator? Have you experienced the
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 321 11/13/14 12:44 PM
322 Speaking to Inform
15.2
ravages of a flood or earthquake? Or you might want to re-create an event that
your parents or grandparents experienced. What was it like to first learn of the
death of President Kennedy on November 22, 1963?
You might have heard a recording of the famous radio broadcast of the
explosion and crash of the dirigible Hindenburg in 1937. The announcer’s ability to
describe both the scene and the incredible emotion of the moment has made that
broadcast a classic even today, 80 years after it occurred. As that broadcaster was
able to do, your purpose as an informative speaker describing an event is to make
that event come alive for your listeners and to help them visualize the scene.
Organize for Effect  Most speeches that are built around an event follow
a chronological arrangement. But a speech about an event might also describe
the complex issues or causes behind the event and thus be organized topically.
For example, if you were to talk about the Civil War, you might choose to focus
on the three causes of the war:
I.	 Political
II.	 Economic
III.	 Social
Although these main points are topical, specific subpoints may be organized
chronologically. However you choose to organize your speech about an event,
your audience should be enthralled by your vivid description.
Speeches about Ideas
Speeches about ideas are usually more abstract than other types of speeches. The
following principles, concepts, and theories might be topics of speeches about ideas:
Principles of communication
Freedom of speech
Evolution
Theories of aging
Islam
Communal living
Positive psychology
Most speeches about ideas are organized topically (by logical subdivisions
of the central idea) or according to complexity (from simple ideas to more com-
plex ones). The following example illustrates how one student organized an idea
topic into an informative speech:
TOPIC: 	 Freudian Psychology
GENERAL PURPOSE: 	 To inform
SPECIFIC PURPOSE: 	
At the end of my speech, the audience should be
able to explain Sigmund Freud’s concepts of id,
ego, and superego.
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 322 11/13/14 12:44 PM
323
Types of Informative Speeches 15.2
I.	 The id is a fundamental element of our personality that is present at birth.
A.	 The id seeks pleasure and avoids pain by serving as a source of our
needs and desires.
B.	 The id is where our basic instincts for survival reside.
C.	 The id seeks to meet our biological needs including food and sex.
II.	 The ego helps us adapt to reality.
A.	 The ego mediates between the needs of the id and the reality of
what is happening around us.
B.	 Our ego regulates our judgment, tolerance, control, and planning
for the future.
C.	 The ego uses defense mechanisms to help us manage the tension
created by the id.
III.	 The superego is influenced by what we have been taught by our
parents, including the cultural norms of society.
A.	 The superego is influenced by what we have been taught by our
parents, including the cultural norms of society.
B.	 The superego serves as our conscience.
C.	 The superego is where our sense of right and wrong resides.
Table 15.1 reviews the five types of speeches we’ve discussed.
Table 15.1  Types of Informative Speeches
Subject Purpose
Typical Organizational
Patterns Sample Topics
Objects Present information about
tangible things
Topical
Spatial
Chronological
The Rosetta Stone
Museums
The Mars Rover
Voting machines
Procedures Review how something works
or describe a process
Chronological
Topical
Complexity
How to . . .
   Use a smartphone app to help you lose weight
   Operate a nuclear-power plant
   Buy a quality used car
  Trap lobsters
People Describe famous people or
personal acquaintances
Chronological
Topical
Sojourner Truth
Nelson Mandela
J. R. R. Tolkien
Your grandmother
Your favorite teacher
Events Describe an event that either
has happened or will happen
Chronological
Topical
Spatial
May Day in Oxford, England
Inauguration Day
Cinco de Mayo
Ideas Present abstract information or
discuss principles, concepts,
theories, or issues
Topical
Complexity
Communism
Immigration
Buddhism
Reincarnation
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 323 11/13/14 12:44 PM
324 Speaking to Inform
15.3
Strategies to Enhance Audience
Understanding
15.3	 Effectively and appropriately use four strategies to enhance audience
understanding.
The skill of teaching and enhancing understanding is obviously important to
teachers, but it’s also important to virtually any profession. Whether you’re a
college professor, chief executive officer of a Fortune 500 company, or a parent
raising a family, you will be called on to teach and explain.
At the heart of creating understanding is the ability to relate the informa-
tion to listeners. Just because an idea, term, or concept has been around for
centuries doesn’t mean that it is easy to understand or that audience members
understand the relevance of the information to their own lives. The Internet
gives us access to a wealth of information, but having access to information
is not the same thing as understanding the information. How do you enhance
someone’s knowledge or understanding? We can suggest several powerful
strategies.
Speak with Clarity
To speak with clarity is to express ideas so that the listener understands the
intended message accurately. Speaking clearly is an obvious goal of an informa-
tive speaker. What is not so obvious is how to speak clearly.
As a speaker, you might think you’re being clear, but only the listener can
tell you whether he or she has received your message. One interesting study
made the point that because the information is clear to you, you’ll likely think
that it’s also clear to your listener.2 People were asked to tap the rhythm of well-
known songs, such as “Happy Birthday to You” or “The Star-Spangled Banner,”
so that another person could guess the song just by hearing the rhythm. About
half of the people who tapped the song thought that the listener would easily
figure out which song was being tapped. However, less than 2 percent of listen-
ers could identify the song. (Try it—can you beat the 2 percent average?) The
point: When you know something, you’re likely to think that it’s also clear to
someone else. Whether it’s how to drive a car or how to care for an aardvark, if
you are already familiar with a topic, you’re likely to think your task of commu-
nicating an idea to someone is easier than it is.
Give careful thought to how you will help listeners understand your mes-
sage. The most effective speakers (those whose message is both understood and
appropriately acted on) build in success by consciously developing and present-
ing ideas with the listener in mind rather than flinging information at listeners
and hoping that some of it sticks. The How To box lists several research-based
strategies that you can use to enhance message clarity.3
15.3
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 324 11/13/14 12:44 PM
325
Strategies to Enhance Audience Understanding 15.3
Use Principles and Techniques of Adult Learning
Most public-speaking audiences you face will consist of adults. Perhaps you’ve
heard of pedagogy, the art and science of teaching children. The word pedagogy
is based on the Greek words paid, which means “child,” and agogos, which means
“guide.” Thus, pedagogy is the art and science of teaching children.
Adult learning is called andragogy.4 Andr is the Greek word that means
“adult.” Andragogy is the art and science of teaching adults. Researchers and
scholars have found andragogical approaches that are best for adult learning. (If
you’re a college student over the age of 18, you are an adult learner.) What are
andragogical, or adult-learning, principles? Here are some of the most impor-
tant ones.5
•	 Provide information that is applicable to audience members’ needs and interests. 
Most people who work in business have an in-basket on their desk to
receive letters that must be read and work that must be done. Each of us
also has a kind of mental in-basket, an agenda for what we want or need
to accomplish. If you present adult listeners with information that they can
apply immediately to their “in-baskets,” they are more likely to focus on
and understand your message.
•	 Actively involve listeners in the learning process. Rather than having your lis-
teners sit passively as you speak, consider asking them questions to think
about or, in some cases, to respond to on the spot.
•	 Connect listeners’ life experiences with the new information they learn. Adult lis-
teners are more likely to understand your message if you help them connect
new information with their past experiences. The primary way to do this is
to know the kinds of experiences that your listeners have had and then refer
to those experiences as you present your ideas.
•	 Make new information relevant to listeners’ needs and their busy lives. Most
adults are busy—probably, if pressed, most will say they are too busy for
Enhance Message Clarity
Communication research Joseph Chesebro has collected the following suggestions:
•	 Preview your main ideas in your introduction.
•	 Tell your listeners how what you present relates to a previous point.
•	 Frequently summarize key ideas.
•	 Provide a visual outline to help listeners follow your ideas.
•	 Provide a handout prior to your talk with the major points outlined. Leave space on your outline
so that listeners can jot down key ideas.
•	 Once you have announced your topic and outline, stay on message.
HOW
TO
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 325 11/13/14 12:44 PM
326 Speaking to Inform
15.3
their own good. So when speaking to an adult audience, realize that any
information or ideas you share will more likely be heard and understood if
you relate what you say to their chock-full-of-activity lives. People working,
going to school, raising families, and involved in their communities need to
be shown how the ideas you share are relevant to them.
•	 Help listeners solve their problems. Most people have problems and are look-
ing for solutions to them. People will be more likely to pay attention to
information that helps them to better understand and solve their problems.
Clarify Unfamiliar Ideas or Complex Processes
If you want to tell your listeners about a complex process, you will need more
than definitions to explain what you mean. Research suggests that you can
demystify a complex process if you first provide a simple overview of the proc­
ess with an analogy, vivid description, or word picture.6
Use Analogies  If a speaker said, “The Milky Way galaxy is big,” you would
have a vague idea that the cluster of stars and space material that make up the
Milky Way was large. But if the speaker said, “If the Milky Way galaxy were as
big as the continent of North America, our solar system would fit inside a coffee
cup,” you’d have a better idea of just how big the Milky Way is and, by compari-
son, how small our solar system is.7 As we discussed in Chapter 8, an analogy is
a comparison of two things. It’s an especially useful technique to describe com-
plex processes because it can help someone to understand something difficult to
grasp (the size of the Milky Way) by comparing it to something already under-
stood (the size of a coffee cup).8
By helping your listeners compare something new to something they already
know or can visualize, you are helping to make your message clear. Here’s
an example of this idea based on what professor of business Chip Heath and
communication consultant Dan Heath call the principle of “using what’s there—
using the information you have (what’s there) and relating it to something more
familiar.”9 Try this short exercise: Take 15 seconds to memorize the letters below;
then close the book and write the letters exactly as they appear in the book.
J  FKFB  INAT  OUP  SNA  SAI  RS
Most people, say these experts, remember about half the letters. Now note
the difference when the same letters are organized just a bit differently. The letters
haven’t changed, but we have regrouped them into acronyms that probably make
more sense to you. You are more likely to make sense out of something for which
you already have an existing mental category. An analogy works the same way.
JFK  FBI  NATO  UPS  NASA  IRS
Use a Vivid, Descriptive Word Picture  When you describe, you pro-
vide more detail than you do when you define something. One way to describe
a situation or event is with a word picture. A word picture is a lively description
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 326 11/13/14 12:44 PM
327
Strategies to Enhance Audience Understanding 15.3
that helps your listeners to form a mental image by appealing to their senses of
sight, taste, smell, sound, and touch. The How To box walks you through in-
structions for developing effective word pictures.
Be sure to describe the emotions that a listener might feel if he or she were
to experience the situation you relate. Ultimately, your goal is to use just the
right words to evoke an emotional response from the listener. If you experienced
the situation, describe your own emotions. Use specific adjectives rather than
general terms such as happy or sad. One speaker, talking about receiving her first
speech assignment, described her reaction with these words:
My heart stopped. Panic began to rise up inside. Me? . . . For the next five
days I lived in dreaded anticipation of the forthcoming event.10
Note how effectively her choices of such words and phrases as “my heart
stopped,” “panic,” and “dreaded anticipation” describe her terror at the prospect
of making a speech—much more so than if she had said simply, “I was scared.”
The more vividly and accurately you can describe emotion, the more inti-
mately involved in your description the audience will become.
Appeal to a Variety of Learning Styles
Would you rather hear a lecture, read the lecture, or see pictures about what the
speaker is saying? Your choice reflects your preferred learning style. Not every-
one has a single preferred style, but many people do. Four common styles are
auditory, visual print, visual, and kinesthetic.
•	 Auditory learners. If you would rather listen to a recorded audio book than
read a book, you may be an auditory learner, a person who learns best by
hearing.
•	 Visual print learners. If you learn best by seeing words in print, then you are
a visual print learner. Most likely you would much rather read material than
hear it presented orally.
Paint a Word Picture
•	 Imagine it.  Begin by forming your own clear mental image of the person, place, or object
before you try to describe it. See it with your “mind’s eye.”
•	 Sense it.  Examine the details of your mental image. What would listeners see if they were
looking at it? What would listeners hear? If they could touch it, how would it feel to them? If
your listeners could smell or taste it, what would that be like?
•	 Describe it.  To describe these sensations, choose the most specific and vivid words possible.
Onomatopoeic words—words that sound like the sounds they name—such as buzz, snort,
hum, crackle, or hiss are powerful. So are similes and other comparisons. “The rock was rough
as sandpaper” and “the pebble was as smooth as a baby’s skin” appeal to both the visual and
tactile senses.
HOW
TO
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 327 11/13/14 12:44 PM
328 Speaking to Inform
15.4
•	 Visual learners. Barraged daily with images from TV and the Internet, many
people have grown to depend on more than words alone to help them
remember ideas and information. They are visual learners, who learn best
with words and images.
•	 Kinesthetic learners. Kinesthetic learners learn best by moving while learn-
ing. They would rather try something than hear it, watch it, or read about it.
These learners like active learning methods such as writing while listening
or, better yet, participating in group activities.
As you develop your speech and your supporting materials, consider how
you can appeal to a variety of learning styles at the same time. Since you’ll be
giving a speech, your auditory learners will like that. Visual learners like and
expect an informative talk to be illustrated with PowerPoint™ images. They
will appreciate seeing pictures or having statistics summarized using bar or line
graphs or pie charts. Kinesthetic learners will appreciate movement, even small
movements such as raising their hands in response to questions. Visual print
learners will appreciate handouts, which you could distribute after your talk.
Quick Check
Enhancing Audience Understanding
•	 Keep your message clear.
•	 Apply adult-learning principles.
•	 Provide information that is applicable to listeners’ lives.
•	 Actively involve listeners in the learning process.
•	 Connect listeners’ experiences with new information.
•	 Make information relevant to listeners.
•	 Help listeners solve problems.
•	 Clarify the unfamiliar or complex with analogies and vivid word pictures.
•	 Plan for many different learning styles.
Strategies to Maintain Audience
Interest
15.4	 Effectively and appropriately use three strategies to maintain audience
interest.
No matter how carefully crafted your definitions, how skillfully delivered your
description, or how visually reinforcing your presentation aid, if your listeners
aren’t paying attention, you won’t achieve your goal of informing them. Strate-
gies for gaining and holding interest are vital in achieving your speaking goal.
15.4
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 328 11/13/14 12:44 PM
329
Strategies to Maintain Audience Interest 15.4
In discussing how to develop attention-catching introductions in Chapter 10,
we itemized several specific techniques for gaining your listeners’ attention. The
following strategies build on those techniques.
Motivate Your Audience to Listen to You
Most audiences will probably not be waiting breathlessly for you to talk to them.
You will need to motivate them to listen to you.
Some situations have built-in motivations for listeners. A teacher can say,
“There will be a test covering my lecture tomorrow. It will count as 50 percent
of your semester grade.” Such threatening methods might not make the teacher
popular, but they certainly will motivate the class to listen. Similarly, a boss
might say, “Your ability to use these sales principles will determine whether you
keep your job.” Your boss’s statement will probably motivate you to learn the
company’s sales principles. However, because you will rarely have the power to
motivate your listeners with such strong-arm tactics, you will need to find more
creative ways to get your audience to listen to you.
Never assume that your listeners will be automatically interested in what
you have to say. Pique their interest with a rhetorical question. Tell them a story.
Tell them how the information you present will be of value to them. As the
British writer G. K. Chesterton once said, “There is no such thing as an uninter-
esting topic; there are only uninterested people.”11
Tell a Story
Good stories with interesting characters and riveting plots have fascinated
listeners for millennia; the words “Once upon a time” are usually surefire
attention-getters. A good story is inherently interesting. Stories are also
a way of connecting your message to people from a variety of cultural
backgrounds.12
One author suggests that, of all the stories ever told since the beginning of
time, in all cultures, there are only seven basic plots: overcoming the monster,
rags to riches, the quest, voyage and return, comedy, tragedy, and rebirth. Think
of a favorite story and see if you can fit it into one of these categories. Another
theory boils the history of stories down even further. It suggests that there is
really only one basic plot: All stories are about overcoming obstacles to find
“home.” This view does not suggest that all characters literally find their way
home; rather, all stories are about striving to find a place, literal or metaphorical,
that represents “home in some way.”13
The characteristics of a well-told tale are simple yet powerful. As the How
To box describes, a good story includes conflict, incorporates action, creates sus-
pense, and may also include humor.
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 329 11/13/14 12:44 PM
330 Speaking to Inform
15.4
Present Information That Relates to Your Listeners
Throughout this book, we have encouraged you to develop an audience-
centered approach to public speaking. Being an audience-centered informative
speaker means being aware of information that your audience can use. If, for
example, you are going to teach your audience pointers about recycling, be sure
to talk about specific recycling efforts on your campus or in your community.
Adapt your message to the people who will be in your audience.
Use the Unexpected
On a flight from Dallas, Texas, to San Diego, California, flight attendant Karen
Wood made the following announcement:
If I could have your attention for a few moments, we sure would love to
point out our safety features. If you haven’t been in an automobile since
1965, the proper way to fasten your seat belt is to slide the flat end into
the buckle. To unfasten, lift up on the buckle and it will release.
As the song goes, there might be fifty ways to leave your lover, but
there are only six ways to leave this aircraft: two forward exit doors, two
over-wing removable window exits, and two aft exit doors. The location
of each exit is clearly marked with signs overhead, as well as red and
white disco lights along the floor of the aisle.
Made ya look!14
Tell a Good Story
•	 Identify a conflict.  Stories that pit one side against another and that include descriptions of
opposing ideas and forces in government, religion, or personal relationships foster attention.
Conflict is often the obstacle that keeps people in the story from finding “home.”
•	 Pay attention to plot.  Good stories have a beginning that sets the stage, a middle that moves
toward a conclusion, and an ending that ties up all the loose ends.
•	 Include some action.  An audience is more likely to listen to an action-packed message than to
one that listlessly lingers on an idea.
•	 Keep listeners in suspense.  Suspense is created when characters in the story may do one of
several things. Tell a story in which the outcome is in doubt. Keeping people on the edge
of their seats because they don’t know what will happen next is another element in good
storytelling.
•	 Consider using appropriate humor.  A fisherman went into a sporting-goods store where the
salesperson showed him a wonderful lure. The fisherman asked, “Do fish really like this thing?”
“I don’t know,” admitted the salesperson, “I don’t sell to fish.”
	     We could have simply said, “It’s important to be audience-centered.” But using a bit of
humor makes the point while holding the listener’s attention. Not all stories have to be funny.
Stories may be sad or dramatic without humor. But adding humor at appropriate times usually
helps to maintain interest and attention while you make your point.
How
To
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 330 11/13/14 12:44 PM
331
Strategies to Maintain Audience Interest 15.4
This clever flight attendant took a predictable announcement and added a
few surprises and novel interpretations to make a boring but important message
interesting. With just a little thought about how to make your message less pre-
dictable, you can add zest and interest to your talks. Listeners will focus on the
unexpected. The sample informative speech in this chapter includes a surprise
in the introduction.
CHOOSING A SPEECH TOPIC
by Roger Fringer15
Today I’d like to talk to you about [pause] tables. Tables are wood . . .
usually . . . and they are. . . . How often do we sit in a class and feel
the intelligence draining out of us? In a speech class, we are given the
opportunity to add to that feeling or to add to the intelligence. Selecting
a meaningful speech topic will make our speeches interesting, important,
as well as being informative. As students, we’ve all been in the situation
of being more anxious than necessary because we are talking about an
unfamiliar or uninteresting speech topic. In our public speaking class,
we spend a number of hours giving speeches and listening to them. If
we have four days of speeches, at what—seven speech topics—that
equals 28 hours spent listening to speeches. Let’s not forget that we are
paying to listen to those speeches. If our tuition is, say, $15,000 a year,
that’s $875 that we have spent listening to those 28 hours of speeches.
We work hard for our tuition, so we should spend it wisely. Spending it
wisely means we don’t waste our time. We don’t waste our own time on
preparing and giving the speeches, and we don’t waste our classmates’
time who have to listen to our speeches. The solution is simple if we take
choosing our topic seriously.
SAMPLE INFORMATIVE SPEECH
Roger cleverly captures
attention by purposefully
starting with an unimaginative
topic and using halting delivery
that makes listeners wonder,
“What’s this really about?”
Roger establishes a common
bond with his listeners by
relating to them as fellow
students who are often
confronted with the same
problem: how to select a topic
for a speech.
Rather than just saying that we
waste time and money when
listening to speeches, Roger
uses statistics specifically
adapted to the audience to
whom he is speaking; this
is a good example of being
audience-centered.
He clearly previews his major
ideas and links them together
by beginning each point with a
word that begins with I.
Here, he uses a signpost by
clearly noting he’s moved to his
second point.
I recommend that we choose topics following The Three I’s to
guide us. The first I is to make speeches interesting. By doing so, we
can alleviate the boredom that so often permeates the public speaking
classroom. If the topic is interesting to us, we will present it in a manner
that shows our interest. We will also keep our audience’s attention when
we know, as students, they can be thinking about a million other things.
Choosing an interesting topic will also alleviate some of the angst, anxiety
we feel while giving the speech topic.
The second I is to make the speech important. The speech should
not only be interesting but important to us. It should be relevant to our
lives now or in the future.
The third I is to make the speech informative. Let’s not waste our
tuition money by not learning anything new in those 28 hours of class
time. This is our opportunity to learn from each other’s experiences and
expertise.
Again, he uses a verbal signpost
to indicate that this is his third
point.
(continued)
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 331 11/13/14 12:44 PM
332 Speaking to Inform
15.4
Besides surprising your listeners, you might maintain their attention by
creating mystery or suspense. Stories are a great way to add drama and interest
to a talk—especially a story that moves audience members to try to solve a
riddle or problem. One technique for creating a “mini-mystery” is to ask a rhe-
torical question. You don’t necessarily expect an audible answer from audience
members, but you do want them to have a mental response. Here’s an example:
“Would you know what to do if you were stranded, out of gas, at night, without
your cell phone?” By getting listeners to ponder your question, you actively
engage them in your message rather than relying on them to passively process
your words.16
Although Roger’s primary
purpose is to inform, he uses a
hypothetical example to tell the
audience how the information
he has given them will help
them solve a problem: how to
find a good speech topic.
Now, just picture yourself putting these ideas into practice. Imagine
sitting in a classroom, listening to your classmates talk about issues or
ideas that are important to them. They are so excited that you can’t help
but be excited about the topic with them. You’re learning from their life
experiences, experiences that you would not have had the opportunity
to learn about if it had not been for their speech. Then, imagine being
able to talk about the experiences and knowledge that are important to
you. Sometimes you only have seven minutes to express what is most
important to you. Besides that, it’s to a captive audience that has no
choice but to listen to you. There are few times in our lives when we
can have an impact on someone else’s life, and we have only a short
amount of time to do it. But in our public speaking class, we can have that
chance. Let’s all think about how we use our time and energy in our public
speaking class. I don’t want to waste my time or have any unnecessary
stress over [pause] tables. I would like all of us to use our opportunities
wisely by choosing topics that are interesting, important, and informative.
Roger provides closure to his
message by making a reference
to the example he used in his
introduction.
Source: Student Speeches Video II, 1st ed. By Allyn & Bacon. Copyright © 2003 by Allyn
& Bacon. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Quick Check
Keeping the Audience Interested
•	 Tell them why they should want to listen.
•	 Tell them a good story.
	 Describe conflict.
	 Describe action.
	 Create suspense.
	 Use humor when appropriate.
•	 Tell them how the information affects them.
•	 Tell them something that surprises them.
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 332 11/13/14 12:44 PM
333
Strategies to Enhance Audience Recall 15.5
Strategies to Enhance Audience
Recall
15.5	 Effectively and appropriately use four strategies to enhance audience
recall of information presented in an informative speech.
Think of the best teacher you ever had. He or she was probably a good lecturer
with a special talent for being not only clear and interesting but also memorable.
The very fact that you can remember your teacher is a testament to his or her
talent. Like teachers, some speakers are better than others at presenting informa-
tion in a memorable way. In this final section, we review strategies that will help
your audiences to remember you and your message.
Build in Redundancy
It is seldom necessary for writers to repeat themselves. If readers don’t under-
stand a passage, they can go back and read it again. When you speak, however,
audience members generally cannot stop you if a point in your speech is unclear
or if their minds wander. It is helpful to repeat key points.
How do you make your message redundant without insulting your listeners’
intelligence?
•	 Provide a clear preview at the beginning of your talk.
•	 Include an explicit summary of your main points in your conclusion.
•	 Sprinkle in one or more internal summaries of your key ideas. An internal
summary is simply a short review of what you have just presented. Internal
summaries make good transitions between major ideas.
•	 Use numeric signposts (numbering key ideas by saying, “My first point
is . . . , My second point is . . . , And now here’s my third point: . . . .”) as
another way of making sure you audience can identify your key ideas.
•	 Use a reinforcing visual aid that displays your key ideas.
•	 If you really want to ensure that listeners come away from your speech
with essential information, consider preparing a handout or an outline of
key ideas. (But as we noted in the chapter on presentation aids, when using
a handout, make sure the audience remains focused on you, not on your
handout.)
Make Your Key Ideas Short and Simple
When we say that you should make your messages simple, we don’t mean that
you need to give 30-second speeches (although we’re sure some speakers and
listeners would prefer half-minute speeches to longer, more drawn-out versions).
Rather, we mean that when you distill your key ideas down to a few brief and
simple phrases, your audience will be more likely to remember what you say.17
15.5
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 333 11/13/14 12:44 PM
334 Speaking to Inform
15.5
Can you remember more than seven things? One classic research study
concluded that people can hold only about seven pieces of information (such
as the numbers in a seven-digit phone number) in their short-term memory.18
If you want your listeners to remember your message, don’t bombard them
with a lengthy list. With the advent of PowerPoint, some speakers may be
tempted to spray listeners with a shower of bulleted information. Resist this
temptation.
An important speech-preparation technique that we’ve suggested is to
crystallize the central idea of your message into a one-sentence summary of
your speech. To help your audience remember your central-idea statement,
make it short enough to fit on a car bumper sticker. For example, rather than
saying, “The specific words that people use and the way in which people
express themselves are influenced by culture and other socioeconomic forces,”
say instead, “Language shapes our culture, and culture shapes our language.”
The message not only is shorter, but also it uses the technique of antithesis
(opposition expressed with a parallel sentence structure), which we discussed
in Chapter 12.
Perhaps you’ve heard this advice as the KISS principle: Keep It Simple, Sweet-
heart. Make your message simple enough for anyone to grasp quickly. Here’s
this idea phrased as a bumper sticker: Keep it short and simple.
Pace Your Information Flow
Organize your speech so that you present an even flow of information, rather
than bunch up too many significant details around one point. If you present
too much new information too quickly, you may overwhelm your audience.
Listeners’ ability to understand may falter.19
You should be especially sensitive to the flow of information if your topic
is new or unfamiliar to your listeners. Make sure that your audience has time to
process any new information you present. Use supporting materials both to help
clarify new information and to slow down the pace of your presentation.
Again, do not try to see how much detail and content you can cram into a
speech. Your job is to present information so that the audience can grasp it, not
to show off how much you know.
Reinforce Key Ideas
The last point is one of the most powerful techniques of all: Reinforce key ideas
verbally or nonverbally to make your idea memorable.
Reinforce Key Ideas Verbally  Suppose you have four suggestions for
helping your listeners to avoid serious sunburn and your last suggestion is the
most important. How can you make sure your audience knows that? Just tell
them. “Of all the suggestions I’ve given you, this last tip is the most important
one: The higher the SPF level on your sunscreen, the better.”
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 334 11/13/14 12:44 PM
335
Developing an Audience-Centered Informative Speech 15.6
You can verbally reinforce an idea by using such phrases as “This is the
most important point” or “Be sure to remember this next point; it’s the most
compelling one.” Be careful not to overuse this technique. If you claim that
every other point is a key point, soon your audience will not believe you.
Reinforce Key Ideas Nonverbally  The way you deliver an idea can
give it special emphasis:
•	 Use gestures. Gestures serve the purpose of accenting or emphasizing key
phrases, as italics do in written messages.
•	 Use vocal cues. Pausing just before or just after making an important point
will focus attention on your thought. Raising or lowering your voice can
also reinforce a key idea.
•	 Use movement. Moving from behind the lectern to tell a personal anecdote
can signal that something special and more intimate is about to be said.
As we discussed in Chapter 13, your movement and gestures should be
meaningful and natural rather than seeming arbitrary or forced. Your need
to emphasize an idea can provide the motivation to make a meaningful
movement.
Quick Check
Enhancing Audience Recall
•	 Say it again. Build in redundancy.
•	 Say it short and simple.
•	 Say it at a steady pace.
•	 Say it nonverbally with pictures and visuals.
Developing an Audience-Centered
Informative Speech
15.6	 Develop an audience-centered informative speech.
In this chapter, we’ve described types of informative speeches and offered nu-
merous principles to follow in helping your listeners understand, maintain
interest in, and remember your message. But when faced with an informative
speaking opportunity, you may still wonder how to go about preparing an infor-
mative speech. Our advice: Use the audience-centered speaking model, shown
in Figure 15.1, to guide you step-by-step through the process.
15.6
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 335 11/13/14 12:44 PM
336 Speaking to Inform
15.6
Consider Your Audience
As with any type of speech, an informative talk requires that you consider three
general questions of audience analysis: To whom are you speaking? What are
their interests, attitudes, beliefs, and values? What do they expect from you?
When your general purpose is to inform, you should focus on specific aspects of
these three general questions:
•	 Part of considering who your audience is will include figuring out, as best
you can, their preferred learning styles.
•	 Determining listeners’ interests, attitudes, beliefs, and values can help you
to balance your use of strategies to enhance understanding and recall with
your need for strategies to maintain interest. You won’t need to work as
hard to maintain the interest of listeners who are already highly interested
in your topic, for example.
•	 Careful consideration of the audience’s expectations can also help you to
maintain their interest, perhaps by surprising listeners with something they
do not expect.
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main
Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select
and Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
Figure 15.1  You can follow the steps of the audience-
centered model of public speaking to craft a successful
informative speech.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 336 11/13/14 12:44 PM
337
Developing an Audience-Centered Informative Speech 15.6
Select and Narrow Your Informative Topic
During the early stages of preparing your message, ask yourself, and answer,
the question “What do they already know about my topic?” If you misjudge
what an audience already knows about your topic, that misjudgment may ham-
per your development of an effective and precise specific-purpose statement.
You should also consider the question “How interested are they in my
topic?” If your audience is both knowledgeable about and interested in your
topic, you can provide greater detail and build on the information audience
members already have. If they are likely to be uninterested or uninformed, then
you’ll need to establish, early in your message, a clear and engaging reason why
they should tune you in.
Determine Your Informative Purpose
You already know that your general purpose is to inform. You also need to
develop a specific behavioral purpose. That is, you need to identify what you’d
like the audience to be able to do when you finish your speech. “Wait a minute,”
you might think. “Shouldn’t an informative speech be about what the audience
should learn rather than do?” Yes, your purpose is focused on what you want the
audience to learn, but we suggest that you phrase your learning goal in terms of
behavior. The How To box gives some suggestions for formulating your specific-
purpose statement.
Develop Your Central Idea
With a clear and precise specific-purpose sentence, you’ll be better prepared
to identify your central idea—a one-sentence summary of your message.
Rather than a fuzzy central-idea sentence such as “C. S. Lewis wrote the Narnia
Formulate Your Informative Specific-Purpose Statement
•	 Use behavioral verbs.  Say what you want your audience members to state, restate, describe,
enumerate, identify, list, summarize, or otherwise do to demonstrate their learning, rather
than merely indicating that you want your audience to know or appreciate some general
information.
•	 Be precise.  Give numbers or other benchmarks to describe the behavior in your verb. A pre-
cise specific-purpose sentence will guide you as you develop your central idea and main ideas,
and it is especially important when you organize your message.
•	 Think of your specific-purpose sentence as a test question.  Imagine that you’re writing a test
for your audience. You might never actually ask your audience your “test question,” but by
thinking of your specific purpose as a test question, you’ll have a clearer goal in mind, one that
will help you in other areas of preparing your message. For example, a test question that asks
what you know about why The Chronicles of Narnia were written is less specific than a ques-
tion that asks you to identify three reasons why the stories were written.
How
To
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 337 11/13/14 12:44 PM
338 Speaking to Inform
15.6
stories for many reasons,” your more specific central idea might be “Three rea-
sons Lewis wrote the Narnia stories are to connect the ‘pictures’ he visualized
in his head, to write an engaging story for children, and to make a larger point
about Christianity.” Your central-idea sentence is your speech in brief. Some-
one who heard only your central idea would understand the essence of your
message.
Generate Your Main Ideas
If you have developed a specific-purpose sentence and have a well-crafted
central-idea sentence, it should be easy to generate your main ideas. In our
C. S. Lewis example, we identified in our central idea three reasons why Lewis
wrote the stories. Those three reasons will become the main ideas of the speech.
The type of informative talk you are planning will influence your central and
main ideas. A speech about an object may lend itself to certain main ideas such
as history, features, and uses of the object, whereas a speech about a person
might be more likely to have main ideas related to the person’s accomplish-
ments or relationship to you, the speaker.
Gather Your Supporting Materials
The type of informative speech you plan to make will often suggest ideas for
supporting materials. Biographical details and stories will most likely support
a speech about a person. Stories, examples, or statistics may help you to teach
your audience about an event or idea. Remember that supporting materials
include presentation aids. As we noted earlier in this chapter, visual aids often
make speeches about objects and “how to” speeches about procedures more
effective. As you gather supporting material, continue to think about your audi-
ence, who will ultimately judge whether your supporting material is interesting
and helpful.
Organize Your Speech
In developing a specific purpose and identifying main ideas, you’ve already
been working on the organization of your message. As you keep your audience
in mind, you now determine what the best sequence of your main points should
be. Your topic and purpose can also help guide you. As we discussed earlier in
the chapter and in Table 15.1, different types of informative speeches lend them-
selves to different organizational patterns.
Rehearse Your Presentation
For informative speeches, it is especially helpful to rehearse in front of other
people, especially people who are similar to your listeners, if possible. Seek their
feedback about whether you are effectively teaching them about your topic. You
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 338 11/13/14 12:44 PM
339
Developing an Audience-Centered Informative Speech 15.6
might even wish to ask your sample audience the test question you developed
as your specific-purpose statement, to determine whether your speech is meet-
ing your learning objectives.
Deliver Your Speech
As we discussed in Chapter13, effective speakers continually look for ways to
adapt and modify their message as they speak. Such adaptation is especially
important in informative speaking. As you speak, watch your audience closely
for signs—such as puzzled facial expressions—that indicate that your listeners
do not understand something. Be alert, too, for signs of wandering attention,
such as fidgeting or lack of eye contact. Be prepared to adapt your message,
using the strategies discussed earlier in this chapter for enhancing listeners’
understanding and maintaining their attention.
Quick Check
Audience-Centered Informative Speaking
•	 Select topic: Consider who the audience is and their interests.
•	 Narrow topic: Find out what the audience already knows.
•	 Determine purpose: State specific audience actions that will show learning.
•	 Formulate central and main ideas: Make ideas clear and simple.
•	 Gather supporting material: Decide what will help audience maintain interest
and learn.
•	 Organize: Match topic with audience needs.
•	 Rehearse: Get sample audience feedback.
•	 Deliver: Adapt delivery to ensure audience comprehension.
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 339 11/13/14 12:44 PM
340 Chapter 15 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
15.1	 List the three major goals of informative speeches.
To inform is to teach someone something you know. Public speakers use specific
goals, principles, and strategies to inform others. Informative speeches have three
goals—to enhance understanding, to maintain interest, and to be remembered.
Key Term
Speech to inform
15.2	 Describe five different types of informative speeches.
Speeches about objects discuss tangible things. Speeches about procedures
explain a process or describe how something works. Speeches about people can
be about either the famous or the little known. Speeches about events describe
major occurrences or personal experiences. Speeches about ideas discuss often
abstract principles, concepts, or theories.
15.3	 Effectively and appropriately use four strategies to enhance audience
understanding.
To enhance your listeners’ understanding of a message, (1) speak with clarity,
(2) use principles and techniques of adult learning, (3) clarify complex processes,
(4) use descriptions effectively, and (5) combine spoken words, visuals, and kin-
esthetic opportunities to appeal to listeners with a variety of learning styles.
Key Terms
Pedagogy
Andragogy
Word picture
15.4	 Effectively and appropriately use three strategies to maintain audience
interest.
To gain and maintain interest in your informative talk, follow four important
principles. First, motivate your audience to listen to you. Second, tell a story; a
well-told story almost always works to keep listeners focused on you and your
message. Third, present information that relates to your listeners’ interests;
in essence, be audience-centered. Finally, use the unexpected to surprise your
audience.
15.5	 Effectively and appropriately use four strategies to enhance audience
recall of information presented in an informative speech.
Help your listeners remember what you tell them by being redundant. Be sure
to keep your main ideas short and simple. Pacing the flow of your information
helps listeners recall your ideas. Reinforcing important points verbally and non-
verbally can also help your audience remember them.
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 340 11/13/14 12:44 PM
341
Chapter 15 study guide
15.6	 Develop an audience-centered informative speech.
You can apply principles of informative speaking to adapt the audience-centered
model of speaking. Choose and narrow your topic by determining what the au-
dience already knows. Use action words in your specific-purpose statement. The
needs of your audience and topic will help you organize your speech and gather
supporting materials. Seek audience feedback on your teaching effectiveness as
you rehearse, and adapt your delivery, if needed, to ensure that the audience
understands your message.
Think about These Questions
•	 To give your five-minute speech about nuclear energy, you must greatly
simplify what is a very complex process. How can you avoid misrepresent-
ing your topic? Should you let your audience know that you are oversim-
plifying the process?
•	 Ken’s boss has given him the task of presenting a report to a group of
potential investors about his company’s recent productivity trends. The
presentation includes many statistics. What suggestions would you offer to
help Ken give an interesting and effective informative presentation?
•	 Before giving a speech to your class in which you share a story that includes
personal information about one of your friends, should you ask permission
from your friend?
•	 What strategies does your public-speaking teacher use in class to enhance
listener recall?
M15_BEEB3981_05_SE_C15_315-342.indd 341 11/13/14 12:44 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
343
Chapter 16
Understanding
Principles of
Persuasive Speaking
“. . . the power
of speech, to stir
men’s blood.”
—William
Shakespeare
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 343 11/17/14 12:56 PM
344 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16
Learning Objectives
	16.1	Describe the goals of persuasive messages.
	16.2	Explain classic and contemporary theories of how persuasion
occurs.
	16.3	Describe four ways to motivate listeners to respond to a persuasive
message.
	16.4	Prepare and present an audience-centered persuasive speech.
It happens to you hundreds of times each day. It appears as commercials on TV,
tweets, Internet ads, and Facebook requests from friends; as advertisements in
magazines and newspapers and on billboards; and as fund-raising letters from
politicians and charities. It also occurs when you are asked to give money to a
worthy cause or to donate blood. “It” is persuasion. Because persuasion is such
an ever-present part of your life, it is important for you to understand how it
works. What are the principles of an activity that can shape your attitudes and
behavior? What do crafters of Internet pop-up ads, salespeople, and politicians
know about how to influence your thinking and behavior that you don’t know?
	16.1	The Goals of Persuasion
Changing or Reinforcing Audience
Attitudes
Changing or Reinforcing Audience
Beliefs
Changing or Reinforcing Audience
Values
Changing or Reinforcing Audience
Behaviors
	16.2	How Persuasion Works
Aristotle’s Traditional Approach:
Using Ethos, Logos, and Pathos to
Persuade
ELM’s Contemporary Approach:
Using a Direct or Indirect Path to
Persuade
Combining Aristotle’s Approach
and the ELM
	16.3	How to Motivate Listeners
Use Cognitive Dissonance
Use Listeners’ Needs
Use Positive Motivation
Use Negative Motivation
	16.4	How to Develop Your Persuasive
Speech
Consider the Audience
Select and Narrow Your Persuasive
Topic
Determine Your Persuasive
Purpose
Develop Your Central Idea and
Main Ideas
Gather Supporting Material
Organize Your Persuasive Speech
Rehearse and Deliver Your Speech
Outline
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 344 11/17/14 12:56 PM
345
The Goals of Persuasion 16.1
In this chapter, we discuss how persuasion works. Such information can
sharpen your persuasive skills and can help you to become a more informed
receiver of persuasive messages. We will define persuasion and discuss the psy-
chological principles underlying efforts to persuade others. We will also discuss
tips for choosing a persuasive speech topic and how to develop arguments for
your speeches. In Chapter 17, we will examine specific strategies for crafting a
persuasive speech.
The Goals of Persuasion
16.1	 Describe the goals of persuasive messages.
Persuasion is the process of changing or reinforcing attitudes, beliefs, values,
or behavior. Note that when trying to persuade someone, you might not nec-
essarily try to change someone’s point of view or behavior but, instead, aim
to reinforce it. Your listeners might already like, believe, or value something or
sometimes do what you’d like them to do; you are trying to strengthen their cur-
rent perspective. Suppose, for example, that your persuasive purpose is to get
people to use their recycling trash bins. The audience may already think that
recycling is a good thing and may even use their recycling bins at least some of
the time. Your speaking goal is to reinforce their behavior so that they use the
recycling bins all the time.
The purposes of informing and of persuading are closely related. We of-
ten provide information to give listeners new insights that may affect their at-
titudes and behavior. Information alone has the potential to convince others, but
when information is coupled with strategies to persuade, the chances of success
increase.
In a persuasive speech, the speaker asks the audience to make a choice
rather than just informing them of the options. As a persuasive speaker, you will
do more than teach; you will ask your listeners to respond to the information
you share. If you want your listeners to respond to your persuasive appeal, you
will need to think carefully about the way in which you structure your message
to achieve your specific purpose. Audience analysis is crucial to achieving your
goal. To advocate a particular view or position successfully, you must under-
stand your listeners’ attitudes, beliefs, values, and behavior.
Changing or Reinforcing Audience Attitudes
Our attitudes represent our likes and dislikes. Stated more technically, an
­
attitude is a learned predisposition to respond favorably or unfavorably toward
something.1 In a persuasive speech, you might try to persuade your listeners to
favor or oppose a new shopping mall, to like bats because of their ability to eat
insects such as mosquitoes, or to dislike an increase in sales tax.
16.1
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 345 11/17/14 12:56 PM
346 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.1
Changing or Reinforcing Audience Beliefs
A persuasive speech could also attempt to change or reinforce a belief. A belief
is something you understand to be true or false. If you believe in something, you
are convinced that it exists or is true. You have structured your sense of what is
real and what is unreal to account for the existence of whatever you believe. If
you believe in God, you have structured your sense of what is real and unreal to
recognize the existence of God.
We hold some beliefs based on faith—we haven’t directly experienced
something, but we believe anyway. However, most beliefs are typically based
on evidence, including past experiences. If you believe the sun will rise in the
east again tomorrow or that nuclear power is safe, you base these beliefs either
on what you’ve directly experienced or on the experience of someone you find
trustworthy. Beliefs are also changed by evidence. As a speaker, you might have
a difficult time, for example, trying to change an audience’s belief that the world
is flat; you would need to show that the existing evidence supports a different
conclusion. Usually it takes a great deal of evidence to change a belief and alter
the way your audience structures reality.
Changing or Reinforcing Audience Values
A persuasive speech could also seek to change or reinforce a value. A value is
an enduring concept of right or wrong, good or bad. If you value something,
you classify it as good or desirable, and you tend to think of its opposite or its
absence as bad or wrong. If you do not value something, you are indifferent
to it. Values form the basis of your life goals and are the motivating force be-
hind your behavior. Most Americans value honesty, trustworthiness, freedom,
loyalty, marriage, family, and money. Understanding what your listeners value
can help you refine your analysis of them and adapt the content of your speech
to those values.
Most of us acquired our values when we were very young and have held
onto them into adulthood. Our values, therefore, are generally deeply ingrained.
It is not impossible to change the values of your listeners, but it is much more
difficult than trying to change a belief or an attitude. Political and religious
points of view, which are usually based on long-held values, are especially dif-
ficult to modify.
Because values change least frequently, they are at the core of the model
shown in Figure 16.1. Beliefs change, but not as much as attitudes. Trying to
change an audience’s attitudes (likes and dislikes) is easier than attempting
to change their beliefs or values. Today we may approve of the president of
the United States; tomorrow we may disapprove of him because of an action
he has taken. We may still believe that the country is financially stable because
of the president’s programs, and we may still value a democratic form of
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 346 11/17/14 12:56 PM
347
The Goals of Persuasion 16.1
government, but our attitude toward the president has changed because of this
policy decision.
We suggest that you think carefully about your purpose for making a per-
suasive speech. Know with certainty whether your objective is to change or to
reinforce an attitude, a belief, or a value. Then determine what you have to do to
achieve your objective.
Changing or Reinforcing Audience Behaviors
Persuasive messages often attempt to do more than change or reinforce attitudes,
beliefs, or values—they may attempt to change or strengthen behaviors. Getting
listeners to eat more fruits and vegetables and to exercise more are typical goals
of persuasive messages that we hear. It seems logical that knowing someone’s
attitudes, beliefs, and values will let us predict precisely how that person will
behave. But we are complicated creatures, and our behavior is not always neatly
predictable. Sometimes our attitudes, beliefs, and values might not appear to be
consistent with how we act. For example, you might know that if you’re on a
low-carb diet, you should avoid that second helping of Dad’s homemade choco-
late cake; but sometimes you’re going to cut off a slice and gobble it up anyway.
Values
Beliefs
Attitudes
Figure 16.1 Attitudes form the outer
ring of this model because they are
easier to change than beliefs or core
values. Beliefs can be changed but not
as easily as attitudes. Values are at the
core of the model because they are
the most deeply ingrained and change
the least frequently.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle
River, NJ
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 347 11/17/14 12:56 PM
348 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.2
How Persuasion Works
16.2	 Explain classic and contemporary theories of how persuasion occurs.
Now that you know what persuasion is and how attitudes, beliefs, and values
influence your behavior, you might still have questions about how persuasion
actually works. Knowing how and why listeners change their minds and their
behavior can help you to construct more effective persuasive messages.
Besides enabling you to persuade others, understanding how persuasion works
can also help you to analyze why you are sometimes persuaded to think or behave
in certain ways. Being conscious of why you respond to specific persuasive mes-
sages can help you to be a better, more discriminating listener to persuasive pitches.
Many theories and considerable research describe how persuasion works.
We’ll discuss two approaches here: first, a classic approach identified by ­
Aristotle
and, second, a more contemporary theory that builds on the classic approach.
Aristotle’s Traditional Approach: Using Ethos,
Logos, and Pathos to Persuade
Aristotle, a Greek philosopher and rhetorician who lived and wrote in the fourth
century b.c.e., is the source of many ideas about communication in general and
persuasion in particular. As we noted in Chapter 5, he defined rhetoric as the
process of discovering in any particular case the available means of persuasion.
When the goal is to persuade, the communicator selects symbols (words and
nonverbal messages, including images and music) to change attitudes, beliefs,
values, or behavior. Aristotle identified three general methods (or, using his lan-
guage, “available means”) to persuade: ethos, logos, and pathos.2
Ethos  To use ethos to persuade, an effective communicator presents informa-
tion that is credible. Aristotle believed that to be credible, a public speaker should
be ethical, possess good character, have common sense, and be concerned for the
well-being of the audience. The more credible and ethical a speaker is perceived to
be, the greater the chances are that a listener will believe in, trust, and positively
16.2
Quick Check
Goals of Persuasion
Persuasion attempts to change or reinforce the following:
•	 Attitudes: Likes and dislikes
•	 Beliefs: Perceptions of what is true or false
•	 Values: What we hold as right and wrong, good or bad
•	 Behavior: What we do or don’t do
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 348 11/17/14 12:56 PM
349
How Persuasion Works 16.2
respond to the persuasive message of the speaker. So one of the means or methods
of persuasion is for the communicator to present information that can be trusted
and to be believable and trustworthy himself or herself. When a friend wants to
convince you to let him borrow your car, he might say, “Trust me. I promise not
to do anything wacky with your car. I’m a responsible guy.” He’s appealing to his
credibility as an ethical, trusted friend. We’ll discuss specific strategies to enhance
your credibility and, thus, your persuasiveness in the next chapter.
Logos  Another means of persuading others is to use logos. The word logos liter-
ally means “the word.” Aristotle used this term to refer to the rational, logical argu-
ments that a speaker uses to persuade someone. A skilled persuader not only reaches
a logical conclusion but also supports the message with evidence and reasoning. The
friend who wants to borrow your car might try using a logical, rational argument sup-
ported with evidence to get your car keys. He might say, “I borrowed your car last
week, and I returned it without a scratch. I also borrowed it the week before that, and
there were no problems—and I filled the tank with gas. So if you loan me your car
today, I’ll return it just like I did in the past.” Your friend is appealing to your ratio-
nal side by using evidence to support his conclusion that your car will be returned
in good shape. In Chapter 17, we’ll provide strategies for developing logical, rational
arguments and supporting those arguments with solid evidence.
Pathos  Aristotle used the term pathos to refer to the use of appeals to emotion.
We sometimes hold attitudes, beliefs, and values that are not logical but simply
make us feel positive. Likewise, we sometimes do things or buy things to make our-
selves feel happy, powerful, or energized. The friend who wants to borrow your
wheels might also use pathos—an emotional appeal—to get you to hand over your
car. He might say, “Look, without transportation, I can’t get to my doctor’s appoint-
ment. I’m feeling sick. I need your help. Friends help friends, and I could use a good
friend right now.” Your buddy is tugging on your emotional heartstrings to moti-
vate you to loan him your car. He’s hoping to convince you to behave in a way that
makes you feel positive about yourself. In the next chapter, we’ll identify more ethi-
cal strategies to appeal to emotions when persuading others.
All three traditional means of persuasion—ethos (ethical credibility), logos (logic),
and pathos (emotion)—are ways of motivating a listener to think or behave in cer-
tain ways. Motivation is the underlying internal force that drives people to achieve
their goals. Our motives explain why we do things.3 Several factors motivate people
to respond to persuasive messages: The need to restore balance to their lives to avoid
stress, the need to avoid pain, and the desire to increase pleasure have been docu-
mented as motives that influence people’s attitudes, beliefs, values, and behavior.
ELM’s Contemporary Approach: Using a Direct or
Indirect Path to Persuade
A newer, research-based framework for understanding how persuasion works
is called the elaboration likelihood model (ELM) of persuasion.4 This theory
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 349 11/17/14 12:56 PM
350 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.2
with a long name is actually a simple idea that offers an explanation of how
people are persuaded to do something or to think about something. Rather
than prescribing how to craft a persuasive message from the standpoint of the
speaker, as Aristotle does, ELM theory describes how audience members inter-
pret persuasive messages. It’s an audience-centered theory of how people make
sense out of persuasive communication.
To elaborate means that you think about the information, ideas, and issues
related to the content of the message you hear. When you elaborate on a mes-
sage, you are critically evaluating what you hear by paying special attention to
the arguments and evidence the speaker is using. The likelihood of whether or
not you elaborate (hence, the term elaboration likelihood model) on a message var-
ies from person to person and depends on the topic of the message.
The theory suggests that there are two ways in which you can be per-
suaded: (1) the direct persuasion route, that you follow when you elaborate,
consciously think about, or critically evaluate a message, and (2) the indirect
persuasion route, in which you don’t elaborate and are instead influenced
by the more peripheral factors of the message and the messenger—you are
less aware of why you are persuaded to respond positively or negatively to a
message.
The Direct Persuasion Route  When you elaborate, you consider what
Aristotle would call the underlying logos, or logic, of the message. You care-
fully and systematically think about the facts, reasoning, arguments, and evi-
dence presented to you, and then you make a thoughtful decision as to whether
to believe or do what the persuader wants. For example, you buy a good data
package for your smartphone because you are convinced you will benefit from
constant access to the Internet; you’ve read the literature and have made a logi-
cal, rational decision. There may be times, however, when you think you are
making a decision based on logic but instead you are being persuaded by less
obvious strategies via an indirect path.
The Indirect Persuasion Route  If you don’t elaborate (that is, if you
don’t use critical thinking skills while listening), you simply develop an overall
impression of what the speaker says and how the speaker says it. The indirect
route is a more intuitive than rational process. You can be persuaded by such
indirect factors as catchy music used in an advertisement or your positive reac-
tion to the attractive and articulate salesperson who wants to sell you a product.
It’s not an evaluation of the logic or content of the advertisement or the salesper-
son’s reasoning or evidence that persuades you; it’s the overall feeling you have
about the product or the salesperson that triggers your purchase. When hearing
a speech, you may be persuaded by the appearance of the speaker (he looks nice;
I trust him); by the sheer number of research studies in support of the speaker’s
proposal (there are so many reasons to accept this speaker’s proposal; she’s con-
vinced me); or by the speaker’s use of an emotionally charged story (I can’t let
that little girl starve; I’ll donate 50 cents to save her).
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 350 11/17/14 12:56 PM
351
How Persuasion Works 16.2
Combining Aristotle’s Approach and the ELM
These two theories, Aristotle’s theory and the ELM, both suggest that persua-
sion is a complex process. Not all of us are persuaded in the same way. Aris-
totle’s theory emphasizes what a speaker should do to influence an audience. If
the speaker discovers the proper application of a credible and ethical message
(ethos), logic (logos), and emotion (pathos), then persuasion is likely to occur.
The elaboration likelihood model describes how listeners process the messages
they hear. Listeners can be persuaded when they directly elaborate (or actively
think about what they hear) and logically ponder how evidence and reasoning
make sense. Or, if they do not elaborate, listeners may be persuaded indirectly,
based on peripheral factors that don’t require as much thought to process, such
as the personal appearance of the speaker or the speaker’s delivery.
Both theories work together to explain how you can persuade others and
how others persuade you. Because you may not know whether your listeners are
directly or indirectly influenced by your message (whether they are elaborating
or not), you will want to use a balance of ethos, logos, and pathos as you think
about how to persuade your listeners. However, it’s your audience, not you, that
ultimately makes sense out of what they hear. So, in addition to the carefully
constructed logic and well-reasoned arguments that you present, you need to be
attuned to the indirect factors that can influence your listeners, such as your deliv-
ery, your appearance, and a general impression of how prepared you seem to be.
These two theories also help to explain how you are influenced by others. You
are influenced by the ethical appeal, logical arguments, and emotions of a speaker.
In addition, the elaboration likelihood model suggests that you may be also di-
rectly affected by the logic and arguments of a speaker. You may also be influ-
enced, even when you’re not aware of it, by such peripheral or indirect elements
of the message as the speaker’s appearance and delivery. Remaining aware of
how you are being persuaded can make you a more effective and critical listener
to the multitude of persuasive messages that come your way each day.
Quick Check
Models Of Persuasion
Aristotle’s Classical Approach
•	 Ethos: The credibility of the speaker
•	 Logos: The logic used to reach a conclusion
•	 Pathos: The appeal to emotion
Elaboration Likelihood Model
•	 Direct route—via elaboration; considering the facts, evidence, and the logic of
the message
•	 Indirect route—without elaboration; relying on an intuitive feeling in response to
peripheral aspects of the message
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 351 11/17/14 12:56 PM
352 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.3
How to Motivate Listeners
16.3	 Describe four ways to motivate listeners to respond to a persuasive
message.
It’s late at night and you’re watching your favorite talk show. The program is
interrupted by a commercial extolling the virtues of a well-known brand of ice
cream. Suddenly, you remember that you have some of the advertised flavor,
Royal Rocky Road. You apparently hadn’t realized how hungry you were for
ice cream until the ad reminded you of the lip-smacking goodness of the cold,
creamy, smooth treat. Before you know it, you are at the freezer, helping yourself
to a couple of scoops of ice cream.
If the makers of that commercial knew how persuasive it had been, they
would be overjoyed. At the heart of the persuasion process is the audience-­
centered process of motivating listeners to respond to a message. The ad
changed your behavior because the message was tailor-made for you.
What principles explain why you were motivated to go to the freezer
at midnight for a carton of ice cream? An audience is more likely to be per-
suaded when you help members to solve their problems or meet their needs.
They can also be motivated when you convince them good things will happen
to them if they follow your advice or bad things will occur if they don’t. We
next discuss several ways to motivate listeners; these approaches are summa-
rized in Table 16.1.
16.3
Table 16.1  How to Motivate Listeners to Respond to Your Persuasive Message
Use Cognitive Dissonance Telling listeners about existing problems
or information that is inconsistent with
their currently held beliefs or known
information creates psychological
discomfort.
Do you value your family’s security? Then you’re
probably worried to learn that many of us would not
be able to support our families if we were injured and
couldn’t work. You can restore your peace of mind
by buying our disability insurance policy.
Use Listeners’ Needs People are motivated by unmet needs.
The most basic needs are physiological,
followed by safety needs, social needs,
self-esteem needs, and finally, self-
actualization needs.
You could be the envy of people you know if
you purchase this sleek new sports car. You will
be perceived as a person of high status in your
community.
Use Positive Motivation People will be more likely to change their
thinking or pursue a particular course of
action if they are convinced that good
things will happen to them if they support
what the speaker advocates.
You should take a course in public speaking
because it will increase your prospects of getting
a good job. Effective communication skills are the
most sought-after skills in today’s workplace.
Use Negative Motivation People seek to avoid pain and
discomfort. They will be motivated to
support what a speaker advocates if they
are convinced that bad things will happen
to them unless they do.
If there is a hurricane, tornado, earthquake, or other
natural disaster, the electrical power may be out and
you may not be able to fill your car with gas. Without
the basics of food and water, you could die. You
need to be prepared for a worst-case scenario by
having an emergency stockpile of water, food, and
gas for your car.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 352 11/17/14 12:56 PM
353
How to Motivate Listeners 16.3
Use Cognitive Dissonance
Dissonance theory is based on the principle that people strive to solve ­
problems
and manage stress in a way that is consistent with their attitudes, beliefs,
and ­values.5 According to the theory, when you are presented with informa-
tion inconsistent with your current attitudes, beliefs, values, or ­
behavior, you
become aware that you have a problem; you experience a kind of discomfort
called ­
cognitive dissonance. The word cognitive has to do with our thoughts.
­
Dissonance means “lack of harmony or agreement.” When you think of a
­
dissonant chord in music, you probably think of a collection of unpleasant
sounds not in tune with the melody or other chords.
Most people seek to avoid feelings of dissonance. Cognitive dissonance,
then, means that you are experiencing a way of thinking that is inconsistent and
uncomfortable. If, for example, you smoke cigarettes and a speaker reminds you
that smoking is unhealthy, this reminder creates dissonance. You can restore bal-
ance and solve the problem either by no longer smoking or by rejecting the mes-
sage that smoking is harmful.
How to Use Cognitive Dissonance  Creating dissonance with a per-
suasive speech, by using the approach shown in the How To box, can be an ef-
fective way to change attitudes and behavior.
Use Cognitive Dissonance to Persuade
Step
	1.	
Identify an existing
problem or need.
	2.	
Create dissonance.
	3.	
Offer a solution that
can restore the
audience’s sense of
balance and comfort.
How
To
Examples
•	 Evie believes that we should only eat organic fruits and
­vegetables.
•	 A candidate for mayor points out that city streets are in
­
desperate need of repair.
•	 Evie seeks to create dissonance by suggesting that we could
more readily develop cancer by eating nonorganic farm
products.
•	 The mayoral candidate blames the current mayor for the
street problems, aiming to create dissonance among listeners
who support the current mayor but would like smooth roads.
•	 Evie offers listeners a way to reduce their dissonance. She
points out that eating more healthful organic fruits and
­
vegetables—precisely what Evie is advocating—can reduce
the threat of cancer.
•	 The candidate also offers listeners a way to restore their
­
balance and feeling of comfort. He suggests that road repairs
will become a priority if they, as voters, elect him mayor.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 353 11/17/14 12:56 PM
354 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.3
Of course, a speaker can’t just assert that something will create a problem;
speakers have an ethical responsibility not to rely on false claims just to create
dissonance. The ethical speaker uses evidence such as facts, statistics, or expert
testimony to document the claims. When listening to a persuasive message, pay
particular attention to the evidence that a speaker uses to convince you that a
problem really does exist.
How Listeners Cope With Dissonance  Effective persuasion requires
more than simply creating dissonance and then suggesting a solution. When
your listeners confront dissonant information, various options are available to
them besides following your suggestions. You need to be aware of the various
ways in which your audience may react before you can reduce their cognitive
dissonance:6
•	 Listeners may discredit the source. Instead of believing everything you say,
your listeners could choose to discredit you. Suppose you drive a Japanese-
made car and you hear a speaker whose father owns a Chevrolet dealership
advocate that all Americans should drive cars made in the United States.
You could agree with him, or you could decide that the speaker is biased be-
cause of his father’s occupation and ignore the suggestion to buy American
automobiles. As a persuasive speaker, you need to ensure that your audi-
ence will perceive you as competent and trustworthy so that they will ac-
cept your message.
•	 Listeners may reinterpret the message. A second way your listeners might
overcome cognitive dissonance and restore balance is to hear what they
want to hear. They may choose to focus on the parts of your message that
are consistent with what they already believe and ignore the unfamiliar or
controversial parts. If you tell a customer looking at a new kind of com-
puter software that it takes ten steps to get into the word-processing pro-
gram but that the program is easy to use, the customer might focus on those
first ten things and decide that the software is too hard to use. Your job as an
effective speaker is to make your message as clear as possible so that your
audience will not reinterpret it. In this case, your task is to emphasize that
the software is easy to use. Choose your words carefully; use simple, vivid
examples to keep listeners focused on what’s most important.
•	 Listeners may seek new information. Another way that listeners cope with
cognitive dissonance is to seek more information on the subject. Your audi-
ence members may look for additional information to negate your position
and to refute your well-created arguments. For example, as the owner of a
minivan, you would experience dissonance if you heard a speaker describe
the recent rash of safety problems with minivans. You might turn to a friend
and whisper, “Is this true? Are minivans really dangerous? I’ve always
thought they were safe.” You would want new information to validate your
ownership of a minivan.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 354 11/17/14 12:56 PM
355
How to Motivate Listeners 16.3
•	 Listeners may stop listening. Some messages are so much at odds with lis-
teners’ attitudes, beliefs, and values that an audience may decide to stop
listening. Most of us do not seek opportunities to hear or read messages
that oppose our opinions. It is unlikely that a staunch Democrat would at-
tend a fund-raiser for the state Republican Party. The principle of selective
exposure suggests that we tend to pay attention to messages that are con-
sistent with our points of view and to avoid those that are not. When we do
find ourselves trapped in a situation in which we must hear a message that
doesn’t support our beliefs, we tend to stop listening. Being aware of the ex-
isting attitudes, beliefs, and values of your audience can help you to ensure
that they won’t tune you out.
•	 Listeners may change their attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior. A fifth way a
listener may respond to dissonant information is to do as the speaker wants.
As we have noted, if listeners change their attitudes, they will reduce the
dissonance that they experience. You listen to a life-insurance salesperson
tell you that when you die, your family will have no financial support. This
creates dissonance; you prefer to think of your family as happy and secure.
So you take out a $250,000 policy to protect your family. This action restores
your sense of balance. The salesperson has persuaded you successfully. The
goals of advertising copywriters, salespeople, and political candidates are
similar. They want you to experience dissonance so that you will change
your attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior.
Quick Check
Coping with Cognitive Dissonance
When your message gives listeners conflicting thoughts, they might
•	 try to discredit you; you need to be competent and trustworthy.
•	 reinterpret your message; you need to be sure it’s clear.
•	 seek other information; you need to make your information convincing.
•	 stop listening; you need to make your message interesting.
•	 be persuaded.
Use Listeners’ Needs
Need is one of the best motivators. The person who is looking at a new car
because he or she needs one is more likely to buy than the person who is just
thinking about how nice it would be to drive the latest model. The more you un-
derstand your listeners’ needs, the greater the chances are that you can gain and
hold their attention and ultimately get them to do what you want.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 355 11/17/14 12:56 PM
356 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.3
The classic theory that outlines basic human needs was developed by
­Abraham Maslow.7 Maslow suggested that there is a hierarchy of needs that
­
motivates everyone’s behavior. Figure 16.2 illustrates Maslow’s five levels of
needs with the most basic at the bottom. Maslow suggested that we need to meet
the basic physiological needs (for food, water, and air) before we can be motivated
to respond to higher-level needs. Although the hierarchical nature of Maslow’s
needs has not been consistently supported by research (for example, we can be
motivated by several needs at the same time), Maslow’s hierarchy provides a use-
ful checklist of potential listener motivations. When attempting to persuade an
audience, a speaker tries to stimulate these needs in order to change or reinforce
attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior. Let’s examine each of these needs.
Physiological Needs  The most basic needs of all humans are physiologi-
cal: We all need air, water, and food. According to Maslow’s theory, unless those
needs are met, it will be difficult to motivate a listener to satisfy other needs.
If your listeners are hot, tired, and thirsty, it will be more difficult to persuade
them to vote for your candidate, buy your insurance policy, or sign your petition
in support of local pet-leash laws. Be sensitive to the basic physiological needs of
your audience so that your appeals to higher-level needs will be heard.
Social needs
Safety needs
Physiological needs
Self-esteem needs
Self-actualization needs
Figure 16.2 According to Maslow, our needs are ordered in a
hierarchy, so that we must satisfy the needs at the base of the
pyramid before we are motivated to address higher-level needs. For
example, if listeners couldn’t afford to meet their basic, physiological
needs for food, it would be difficult to sell them a life insurance policy
to address their safety needs.
Source: Based on Abraham Maslow, Motivation and Personality (New York: HarperCollins,
1954).
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 356 11/17/14 12:56 PM
357
How to Motivate Listeners 16.3
Safety Needs  Listeners are concerned about their safety. We all have a need
to feel safe, secure, and protected, and we need to be able to predict that our
own and our loved ones’ needs for safety will be met. The classic presentation
from insurance salespeople includes appeals to our need for safety and security.
Many insurance sales efforts include photos of wrecked cars, anecdotes about
people who were in ill health and could not pay their bills, or tales of the head
of a household who passed away, leaving the basic needs of a family unmet.
Appeals to use safety belts, stop smoking, start exercising, and use condoms all
play to our need for safety and security.
In a speech titled “Emissions Tampering: Get the Lead Out,” John appealed
to his listeners’ need for safety and security when he began his speech with these
observations:
A major American producer is currently dumping over 8,000 tons of lead
into our air each year, which in turn adversely affects human health. The
producers of this waste are tampering with pollution control devices in
order to cut costs. This tampering escalates the amount of noxious gases
you and I inhale by 300 to 800 percent. That producer is the American
motorist.8
Social Needs  We all need to feel loved and valued. We need contact with
others and reassurance that they care about us. According to Maslow, these so-
cial needs translate into our need for a sense of belonging to a group (fraternity,
religious organization, friendships). Powerful persuasive appeals are based on
our need for social contact. We are encouraged to buy a product or support a
particular issue because other people are buying the product or supporting the
issue. The message is that to be liked and respected by others, we must buy the
same things they do or support the same causes they support.
Self-Esteem Needs  The need for self-esteem reflects our desire to think
well of ourselves. Civil rights activist Jesse Jackson is known for appealing often
to the self-worth of his listeners by inviting them to chant, “I am somebody.”
This is a direct appeal to his listeners’ need for self-esteem. Advertisers also ap-
peal to our need for self-esteem when they encourage us to believe that we can
be noticed by others or stand out in the crowd if we purchase their product.
Commercials promoting luxury cars usually invite you to picture yourself in the
driver’s seat with a beautiful companion while you receive looks of envy from
those you pass on the road.
Self-Actualization Needs  At the top of Maslow’s hierarchy is the need
for self-actualization. This is the need to fully realize one’s highest potential.
For many years, the U.S. Army used the slogan “Be all that you can be” to tap
into the need for self-actualization. Calls to be the best and the brightest are ap-
peals to self-actualization. According to Maslow’s assumption that our needs are
organized into a hierarchy, needs at the other four need levels must be satisfied
before we can be motivated to satisfy the highest-level need.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 357 11/17/14 12:56 PM
358 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.3
Use Positive Motivation
A Depression-era politician claimed that a vote for him would result in a return
to prosperity: “A chicken in every pot” was his positive motivational appeal.
Positive motivational appeals are statements suggesting that good things will
happen if the speaker’s advice is heeded. A key to using positive motivational
appeals effectively is to know what your listeners value. Knowing what audi-
ence members view as desirable, good, and virtuous can help you to select the
benefits of your persuasive proposal that best appeal to them.
Emphasize Positive Values  What do most people value? A comfortable,
prosperous life; stimulating, exciting activity; a sense of accomplishment; world,
community, and personal peace; and happiness are some of the many things
people value. How can you use these values in a persuasive speech? When iden-
tifying reasons for your audience to think, feel, or behave as you want them to,
review those common values to determine what benefits would accrue to your
listeners. If, for example, you want your listeners to enroll in a sign-language
course, what would the benefits be to the audience? You could stress the sense of
accomplishment, contribution to society, or increased opportunities for friend-
ship that would develop if they learned this skill. A speech advocating that re-
cording companies print the lyrics of all songs on the label of a recording could
appeal to so-called family values.
Emphasize Benefits, Not Just Features A benefit is a good result or
something that creates a positive feeling for the listener. A feature is simply a
characteristic of whatever it is that you’re talking about. A benefit creates a posi-
tive emotional sizzle that appeals to the heart. A feature elicits a rational, cogni-
tive reaction—it appeals to the head. The heart usually trumps the head when
persuading others.
Most salespeople know that it is not enough just to identify, in general
terms, the features of their product. They must translate those features into an
obvious benefit that enhances the customer’s quality of life. It is not enough for
the real-estate salesperson to say, “This floor is the new no-wax vinyl.” It is more
effective to add, “And this means that you will never have to get down on your
hands and knees to scrub another floor.” When using positive motivational ap-
peals, be sure that your listeners know how the benefits of your proposal can
improve their quality of life or the lives of their loved ones.
Use Negative Motivation
“If you don’t stop that, I’m going to tell Mom!” Whether he or she realizes it or
not, the sibling who threatens to tell Mom is using a persuasive technique called
fear appeal. One of the oldest methods of trying to change someone’s attitude or
behavior, the use of a threat is also one of the most effective. In essence, the ap-
peal to fear takes the form of an “if–then” statement: If you don’t do X, then aw-
ful things will happen to you. A persuader builds an argument on the assertion
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 358 11/17/14 12:56 PM
359
How to Motivate Listeners 16.3
that a need will not be met unless the desired behavior or attitude change oc-
curs. The principal reason that appeals to fear continue to be made in persuasive
messages is that they work. Various research studies support the following prin-
ciples for using fear appeals.9
•	 A strong threat to a loved one tends to be more successful than a fear appeal directed
at the audience members themselves. A speaker using this principle might say,
“Unless you see to it that your children wear safety belts, they could easily
be injured or killed in an auto accident.”
•	 The more competent, trustworthy, or respected the speaker, the greater the likelihood
that an appeal to fear will be successful. A speaker with less credibility will be
more successful with moderate threats. The U.S. Surgeon General will be
more successful in convincing people to get a flu shot than you will.
•	 Fear appeals are more successful if you can convince your listeners that the threat is
real. You also need to convince them that the threat will probably occur unless
they take the action you are advocating. For example, you could dramatically
announce, “Last year, thousands of smokers developed lung cancer and died.
Unless you stop smoking, there is a high probability that you could develop
lung cancer, too.” Remember, however that you have an ethical responsibility
to be truthful and not exaggerate when trying to arouse listeners’ fear.
•	 Strong fear appeals generally work even better than mild ones. This is especially
true if the listener can take action (the action the persuader is suggesting)
to reduce the threat.10 In the past, some researchers reported that when a
speaker creates an excessive amount of fear and anxiety in listeners, the lis-
teners may find the appeal so strong and annoying that they stop listening.
More comprehensive research, however, has concluded that there is a direct
link between the intensity or strength of the fear appeal and the likelihood
that audience members will be persuaded.
•	 Fear appeals are more successful when you can convince your listeners that
they have the power to make a change that will reduce the fear-causing threat.
As a speaker, your goal is not only to arouse audience members’ fear
but also to empower them to act. When providing a solution to the fear-­
inducing problem, make sure you tell your listeners what they can do to
reduce the threat.11 View the solution from your listeners’ point of view. If,
for example, you tell your listeners that unless they lose weight, they will
die prematurely, they may want to shed pounds but think it’s just too hard
to do. You’ll be a more effective persuader if you couple your fear-­
arousing
message (lose weight or die early) with a strategy to make weight loss
achievable (here’s a diet plan that you can follow; it is simple and it works).
The effectiveness of the fear appeal is based on the theories of cognitive dis-
sonance and Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. The fear aroused creates dissonance,
which can be reduced by following the recommendation of the persuader. Ap-
peals to fear are also based on targeting an unmet need. Fear appeals depend on
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 359 11/17/14 12:56 PM
360 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.4
a convincing insistence that a need will go unmet unless a particular action or
attitude change occurs.
Cognitive dissonance, needs, and appeals to the emotions, both positive
and negative, can all persuade listeners to change their attitudes, beliefs, values,
and behavior. Realize, however, that persuasion is not as simple as these ap-
proaches might lead you to believe. There is no precise formula for motivating
and convincing an audience; attitude change occurs differently in each individ-
ual. Persuasion is an art that draws on science. Cultivating a sensitivity to listen-
ers’ emotions and needs and ethically using public-speaking strategies you have
learned will help you to make your persuasive messages effective.
Quick Check
Using Fear Appeals Effectively
Fear appeals are more effective when
•	 the fear appeal is directed toward loved ones.
•	 you have high credibility.
•	 the threat is perceived as real and may actually happen.
•	 the fear appeal is strongly supported by evidence.
•	 the fear appeal empowers listeners to act.
How to Develop Your Persuasive
Speech
16.4	 Prepare and present an audience-centered persuasive speech.
Although you now understand what persuasion is and how it works, you may
still be concerned about how to go about preparing your persuasive speech. The
process of developing a persuasive speech follows the same audience-centered
path you would take to develop any speech, as illustrated by our now familiar
model of the speechmaking process in Figure 16.3. You consider your audience
at every step when attempting to persuade listeners.
Consider the Audience
Although being audience-centered is important in every speaking situation, it
is vital when your objective is to persuade. It would be a challenge to persuade
someone without knowing something about his or her interests, attitudes, be-
liefs, values, and behaviors.
Remember that while you are speaking, audience members have a variety
of thoughts running through their heads. Your job as a speaker is to develop a
16.4
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 360 11/17/14 12:56 PM
361
How to Develop Your Persuasive Speech 16.4
message that anticipates, as best you can, what your audience may be think-
ing and feeling when they listen to you. The audience analysis and adaptation
techniques discussed in Chapter 6 can help you anticipate and plan to overcome
objections your audience may have to your persuasive message.
Consider Audience Diversity  Researchers have discovered no uni-
versal, cross-cultural approach to persuasion that is effective in every culture.
Persuasion works differently for different cultural groups. North Americans,
for example, tend to place considerable importance on direct observations and
verifiable facts. Our court system places great stock in eyewitness testimony.
People in some Chinese cultures, by contrast, consider such evidence unreliable
because they believe that what people observe is always influenced by personal
motives. In some African cultures, personal testimony is also often suspect; it
is reasoned that if you speak up to defend someone, you must have an ulterior
motive and therefore your observation is discounted.12 Although your audience
might not include listeners from Africa or China, given the growing diversity
of Americans, it is increasingly likely that it may. Or you might have listeners
from other cultures with still different perspectives. Our point: Don’t design a
persuasive message using strategies that would be effective only for those with
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Figure 16.3 Considering the audience is central to all
speechmaking, especially persuasive speaking.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 361 11/17/14 12:56 PM
362 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.4
your own cultural background. An effective audience-centered communicator
is especially sensitive to cultural differences between himself or herself and the
audience, while at the same time being cautious not to make stereotypical as-
sumptions about an audience based only on cultural factors.
Remember Your Ethical Responsibilities As A Persuader  As you
think about your audience and how to adapt your message to them, we remind
you of your ethical responsibilities when persuading others. Fabricating evi-
dence or trying to frighten your listeners with bogus information is unethical.
Creating dissonance in the minds of your listeners based on information that
you know to be untrue is also unethical. You also have an ethical obligation to
tell readers the source of your information. Adapting to your listeners does not
mean that you tell people only what they want to hear. It means developing an
ethical message to which your audience will listen thoughtfully.
Select and Narrow Your Persuasive Topic
Deciding on a persuasive speech topic sometimes stumps beginning speakers.
The How To box offers some advice.
Pick a Persuasive Speech Topic
For a persuasive presentation, you can adapt our general advice for picking a speech topic:
•	 Consider yourself.  What are you passionate about? What issues stir your heart and mind?
You’ll present a better speech if you have selected a topic about which you can speak with
sincere conviction.
•	 Consider your audience.  The ideal topic speaks to a need, concern, or issue of the audience
as well as to your interests and zeal. The Internet, Facebook, and YouTube can help you iden-
tify topics that your audience may feel passionately about.
•	 Consider the occasion.  Some speech occasions, such as political rallies, may have built-in
topics. For others, interpret the term occasion broadly to refer to the events currently happen-
ing around you. Here’s how to use current events to find a topic:
•	 Look for controversies.  Controversial issues make excellent sources for persuasive top-
ics. A controversial issue is a question about which people disagree: Should the university
increase tuition so that faculty members can have a salary increase? Should public schools
distribute condoms to students? Should the government provide health insurance to all
citizens? Social media, such as Facebook, can often bring controversial topics to your
­attention.
•	 Look for an important issue.  The best persuasive speech topics focus on important rather
than frivolous issues.
•	 Look at the media.  Read an online newspaper or magazine, follow news sources on
Twitter, or subscribe to a newspaper to keep in touch with issues and topics of interest.
Another interesting source of controversial issues is talk radio programs, both national and
local.
How
To
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 362 11/17/14 12:56 PM
363
How to Develop Your Persuasive Speech 16.4
Determine Your Persuasive Purpose
When you persuade others, you don’t always have to strive for dramatic changes
in their attitudes, beliefs, values, and behavior. People rarely make major life
changes after hearing just one persuasive message. Your speaking goal may be
to move listeners a bit closer to your ultimate persuasive objective.
Social judgment theory suggests that when listeners are confronted with
a persuasive message, their responses fall into one of three categories: (1) a lati-
tude of acceptance, in which they generally agree with the speaker; (2) a latitude
of rejection, in which they disagree with the speaker; (3) a latitude of noncom-
mitment, in which they are not yet committed either to agree or disagree—they
are not sure how to respond.13
It is important to know which latitude your listeners are in before you be-
gin so that you can choose a realistic persuasive goal. If most of your listeners
are in the latitude of rejection, it will be difficult to move them to the latitude of
acceptance in a single ten-minute speech. As shown in Figure 16.4, perhaps the
best you can do is to make them less certain about rejecting your idea by moving
them to the latitude of noncommitment. Sometimes just getting audience mem-
bers to listen and not reject a new idea may be all you can hope to accomplish.
Develop Your Central Idea and Main Ideas
The overall structure of your speech flows from your central idea and the main
ideas that support your central idea. Your central idea, as you recall, is a one-
sentence summary of your speech. When persuading others, most speakers find
Latitude of Rejection
Listeners disagree
with the speaker
Latitude of Acceptance
Listeners agree
with the speaker
Latitude of Noncommitment
Listeners are uncommitted
or not sure how to respond
Speaker’s position
(in favor of proposal)
Speaker’s realistic speech
objective (Audience will be
uncommitted and will listen to
an alternative point of view.)
Audience’s initial
position (against
speaker’s proposal)
Figure 16.4 A Model of Social Judgment Theory
When developing your specific persuasive objective for one speech, be realistic. According to
social judgment theory, your goal may be to nudge your audience along the continuum of accept-
ance toward the latitude of noncommitment rather than to propel them from one end to the other.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 363 11/17/14 12:56 PM
364 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.4
it useful to state their central idea in the form of a proposition. A proposition is
a statement with which you want your audience to agree. In the following list,
note how each proposition is actually the central idea of the speech:
All students should be required to take a foreign language.
Organic gardening is better for the environment than gardening using
chemicals.
The United States should not provide economic aid to other countries.
The three categories of propositions are propositions of fact, propositions of
value, and propositions of policy. These three types of propositions are summa-
rized in Table 16.2. Determining which category your persuasive proposition fits
into not only can help you clarify your central idea but can also give you an idea
of how to select specific persuasive strategies that will help you to achieve your
specific purpose. Let’s examine each type of proposition in more detail.
Proposition of Fact A proposition of fact focuses on whether something
is true or false or on whether it did or did not happen. Some propositions of
fact are undebatable: Barack Obama received more popular votes than did Mitt
Romney in the 2012 presidential election. The Baltimore Ravens won the 2013
Super Bowl. Texas is bigger than Poland. Each of these statements is a proposi-
tion of fact that can be verified simply by consulting an appropriate source. For
that reason, they do not make good topics for persuasive speeches.
Other propositions of fact will take more time and skill—perhaps an entire
persuasive speech—to prove. Here are examples of debatable propositions of
fact that would make good topics:
When women joined the military, the quality of the military improved.
Adults who were abused as children by their parents are more likely to
abuse their own children.
U.S. foreign policy has decreased the probability that the United States will
experience more terrorist attacks.
Global climate change is not occurring in our atmosphere.
Table 16.2  Persuasive Propositions: Developing Your Central Idea
Type Definition Examples
Proposition of fact A statement that focuses on whether
something is true or false. Debatable
propositions of fact can be good topics for
persuasive speeches.
Undebatable: The state legislature has raised tuition
10 percent during the last three years.
Debatable: There are more terrorist attacks occurring in the
world today than at any previous time in human history.
Proposition of value A statement that either asserts that
something is better than something else
or presumes what is right or wrong or
good or bad.
The electoral college is a better way to elect presidents than
a direct popular vote would be.
It is better to keep your financial records on a personal
computer than to make calculations by hand.
Proposition of policy A statement that advocates a change in
policy or procedures.
Our community should adopt a curfew for all citizens under
age eighteen.
All handguns should be abolished.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 364 11/17/14 12:56 PM
365
How to Develop Your Persuasive Speech 16.4
To prove each of these propositions, a speaker would need to provide spe-
cific supporting evidence. To persuade listeners to agree with a proposition of
fact, the speaker must focus on changing or reinforcing their beliefs. Most per-
suasive speeches that focus on propositions of fact begin by identifying one or
more reasons that the proposition is true.
The following persuasive speech outline on the topic of low-carb diets is
based on a proposition of fact:
TOPIC:	 Low-carbohydrate diets
GENERAL PURPOSE:	 To persuade
PROPOSITION:	 Low-carbohydrate diets are safe and effective.
SPECIFIC PURPOSE:	
At the end of my speech, audience members will
agree that low-carb diets are safe and effective.
MAIN IDEAS:	 I.	
Carbohydrates are a significant part of our
diets.
A. 
Many people eat a significant amount of fast
food that is laden with carbohydrates.
B. 
Lunches provided by the cafeterias in
elementary schools include significant
amounts of carbohydrates.
C. 
Many people eat a significant amount of
highly processed, carb-rich foods.
	 II.	
Carbohydrates are making people fat and
unhealthy.
A.  A diet rich in carbohydrates leads to obesity.
B. 
A diet rich in carbohydrates leads to Type
II diabetes.
	 III.	
Low-carb diets are a safe and effective way to
lose weight and maintain your health.
A. 
The safety of such low-carb diets as the
South Beach diet or the Paleo diet is docu-
mented by research.
B. 
The effectiveness of such low-carb diets is
documented by research.
Proposition of Value A proposition of value is a statement that calls for
the listener to judge the worth or importance of something. Values, as you recall,
are enduring concepts of good or bad, right or wrong. Value propositions are
statements that something is either good or bad or that one thing or course of
action is better than another. Consider these examples:
It is wrong to turn away immigrants who want to come to the United States.
Communication is a better major than history.
A private-school education is more valuable than a public-school education.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 365 11/17/14 12:56 PM
366 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.4
It is better for teachers to carry concealed weapons than to be defenseless
against violent school intruders.
Each of these propositions either directly states or implies that something is
­
better than something else. Value propositions often compare two things ­
directly
and suggest that one of the options is better than another.
Manny designed his speech to convince an audience that reggae music is
better than rock music.
TOPIC:	 Reggae music
GENERAL PURPOSE:	 To persuade
PROPOSITION:	
Reggae music is better than rock music for three
reasons.
SPECIFIC PURPOSE:	
After listening to my speech, the audience should
listen to reggae music more often than they listen
to rock music.
MAIN IDEAS:	 I.	
Reggae music communicates a message of
equality for all people.
	 II.	
Reggae music and its rhythms evoke a
­
positive, uplifting mood.
	 III.	
Reggae music draws on a variety of cultural
and ethnic traditions.
Proposition of Policy  The third type of proposition, a proposition of
policy, advocates a specific action—changing a policy, procedure, or behavior.
Note how all the following propositions of policy include the word should; this is
a tip-off that the speaker is advocating a change in policy or procedure.
The Gifted and Talented Program in our school district should have a full-
time coordinator.
Our community should set aside one day each month as “Community
Cleanup Day.”
Wealthy senior citizens should pay for more of their medical costs than the
poor senior citizens.
In a speech based on a proposition of policy, Paul aimed to convince his
audience that academic tenure for college professors should be abolished. He
organized his speech topically, identifying reasons academic tenure is no longer
a sound policy for most colleges and universities. To support his proposition of
policy, he used several propositions of fact. Note, too, that his specific purpose
involved specific action on the part of his audience.
TOPIC:	 Academic tenure
GENERAL PURPOSE:	 To persuade
PROPOSITION:	
Our college, along with other colleges and univer-
sities, should abolish academic tenure.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 366 11/17/14 12:56 PM
367
How to Develop Your Persuasive Speech 16.4
SPECIFIC PURPOSE:	
After listening to my speech, audience members
should sign a petition calling for the abolition of
academic tenure.
MAIN IDEAS:	 I.	 Academic tenure is outdated.
	 II.	 Academic tenure is abused.
	 III.	
Academic tenure contributes to ineffective
education.
Here’s another outline for a persuasive speech based on a proposition of
policy. This one uses a problem–solution organization Again, note how the ma-
jor ideas are propositions of fact used to support the proposition of policy.
TOPIC:	 Computer education
GENERAL PURPOSE:	 To persuade
PROPOSITION:	
Every person in our society should know how to
use a personal computer.
SPECIFIC PURPOSE:	
After listening to my speech, all audience mem-
bers who have not had a computer course should
sign up for one.
MAIN IDEAS:	 I.	
Most people who own a personal computer
do not know how to use most of its features.
	 II.	
Computer skills will help you with your aca-
demic studies.
	 III.	
Computer skills will help you get a good job,
regardless of your major or profession.
Gather Supporting Material
When gathering supporting material for your persuasive message, look for the
available means of persuasion to support the main ideas that you have developed
to achieve your specific purpose. Recall from earlier in this chapter that ­
Aristotle
proposed three primary ways, or available means, of persuading listeners:
(1) being a credible and ethical speaker, which includes using credible and ethical
supporting material; (2) using effective logic and reasoning to support your main
ideas; and (3) using appropriate emotional support. Because the supporting mate-
rial that you develop and use is vital to the effectiveness of your persuasive goal,
we devote a major portion of the next chapter to these three means of persuasion.
Organize Your Persuasive Speech
After identifying and gathering ethical, logical, and appropriate emotional support
for your message, you’ll make final decisions about how to organize your message.
As with any speech, you’ll have an introduction that should get the audience’s at-
tention, give the audience a reason to listen to your message, introduce the subject,
establish your credibility, and preview your main ideas. The body of your speech
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 367 11/17/14 12:56 PM
368 Understanding Principles of Persuasive Speaking
16.4
should have clearly identified major points with appropriate transitions, signposts,
and internal summaries to make sure your key ideas are understandable to your
listeners. And, finally, you’ll have a conclusion that summarizes the essence of your
message and provides closure to your speech. When your goal is to persuade, it is
especially important to consider your audience and your specific purpose as you
begin your message, organize your ideas, and conclude your talk. We’ll discuss spe-
cific approaches and tips for organizing a persuasive speech in the next chapter.
Rehearse and Deliver Your Speech
To bring your ideas to life, the last two elements of the speechmaking process are
to rehearse your message out loud and then, finally, to present your talk to your
audience. When your goal is to persuade, you might want to make a special effort
to rehearse your speech in front of another person or to run some of your ideas
past other people to check the overall clarity and structure of your message.
It is through your delivery that you communicate your passion and enthu-
siasm for your ideas, so it would be worthwhile to review the suggestions and
prescriptions we offered in Chapter 13 for how to ensure that your speech is
well delivered. Although you may have a well-crafted message, without ample
emotional energy, your speech may not achieve its purpose. Your eye contact,
gestures, movement, posture, facial expression, vocal eye contact, and personal
appearance are the means by which you’ll reinforce your credibility and logic, as
well as make an authentic emotional connection with your listeners.
Recall, too, that the elaboration likelihood model predicts that your delivery can,
in itself, be persuasive to some of your listeners. No matter how well reasoned your
message, at least some of your listeners are likely to fail to elaborate, or critically con-
sider it. These listeners may instead be persuaded by an indirect route, one based on
the emotional connection you make with them in the course of delivering your speech.
Quick Check
Audience-Centered Persuasive Speaking
•	 Consider audience attitudes, beliefs, values, and behaviors.
•	 Consider audience diversity.
•	 Controversial issues make good persuasive topics.
•	 Use social judgment theory to determine purpose.
•	 State your central idea as a proposition of fact, value, or policy.
•	 Find supporting materials that reinforce your credibility, logic, and emotional
appeals.
•	 Use a clear organizational pattern.
•	 Get feedback as you rehearse.
•	 Deliver your speech with appropriate emotion.
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 368 11/17/14 12:56 PM
369
Chapter 16  study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
16.1	 Describe the goals of persuasive messages.
Persuasion is the process of changing or reinforcing attitudes, beliefs, values, or
behavior. Attitudes are learned predispositions to respond favorably or unfavor-
ably toward something. A belief is a person’s understanding of what is true and
what is false. A value is an enduring concept of right or wrong, good or bad.
Key Terms
Persuasion
Attitude
Belief
Value
16.2	 Explain classic and contemporary theories of how persuasion occurs.
Aristotle suggested using ethos, logos, and pathos as methods to persuade
­
others. The elaboration likelihood model suggests that listeners either follow
a direct route to persuasion, in which they elaborate (think about) the issues
and evidence, or they can be persuaded via an indirect route when they don’t
­elaborate.
Key Terms
Ethos
Logos
Pathos
Motivation
Elaboration likelihood
 
model (ELM) of
persuasion
Elaborate
Direct persuasion route
Indirect persuasion
 route
16.3	 Describe four ways to motivate listeners to respond to a persuasive message.
One way to motivate listeners is to cause cognitive dissonance or discomfort.
Listeners may change their attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior in order to to
maintain intellectual balance or cognitive consistency.
A second approach to motivation is to satisfy listeners’ needs. Abraham
Maslow identified a five-level hierarchy of needs, including physiological,
safety, social, self-esteem, and self-actualization needs.
Third, positive motivational appeals can help you develop a persuasive
message by encouraging listeners to respond favorably to your message.
A fourth approach to persuasion is the use of negative motivational appeals.
Fear can motivate us to respond favorably to a persuasive suggestion. To avoid
pain or discomfort, we may follow the recommendation of a persuasive speaker.
Key Terms
Cognitive dissonance
Self-actualization
Benefit
Feature
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 369 11/17/14 12:56 PM
370 Chapter 16  study guide
16.4	 Prepare and present an audience-centered persuasive speech.
Speakers can prepare a persuasive speech by applying broad principles of per-
suasion to the same processes they use to prepare and present any other kind of
speech. A key first concern is to consider the audience at each step of the process.
The next concern is to choose an appropriate topic. When crafting your central
idea for your persuasive speech, develop a proposition of fact, value, or policy
that is reasonable based on your audience’s background and expectations. Prin-
ciples of persuasion can also guide you as you gather supporting materials, or-
ganize, rehearse, and deliver your speech.
Key Terms
Social judgment theory
Proposition
Proposition of fact
Proposition of value
Proposition of policy
Think about These Questions
•	 If you were attempting to sell a new computer system to the administration
of your school, which persuasive principles would you draw on to develop
your message?
•	 Your local chamber of commerce has asked for your advice in training
other speakers to address public-safety issues in your community. What
suggestions would you offer those speakers to help them motivate citizens
to behave in ways that would protect them from gang violence, traffic, and
severe weather?
•	 Tom plans to begin his speech on driver safety by using a graphic photo of
traffic-accident victims who were maimed or killed because they did not
use safety belts. Would such a graphic use of fear appeals be ethical? Why
or why not?
M16_BEEB3981_05_SE_C16_343-370.indd 370 11/17/14 12:56 PM
371
Chapter 17
Using Persuasive
Strategies
“Speech is power:
Speech is to per-
suade, to convert,
to compel.”
—Ralph Waldo
Emerson
	17.1	Enhancing Your Credibility
Elements of Your Credibility
Phases of Your Credibility
	17.2	Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade
Understanding Types of Reasoning
Persuading the Culturally Diverse
Audience
Supporting Your Reasoning with
Evidence
Using Evidence Effectively
Avoiding Faulty Reasoning
	17.3	Using Emotion to Persuade
Tips for Using Emotion to Persuade
Using Emotional Appeals: Ethical
Issues
Outline
(continued)
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 371 11/13/14 2:40 PM
372 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.1
	17.4	Strategies for Adapting Ideas to
People and People to Ideas
Persuading the Receptive Audience
Persuading the Neutral Audience
Persuading the Unreceptive
Audience
	17.5	Strategies for Organizing Persuasive
Messages
Problem–Solution
Refutation
Cause and Effect
The Motivated Sequence
Learning Objectives
	17.1	Identify and use strategies to improve your initial, derived, and
terminal credibility.
	17.2	Use principles of effective logic and evidence to develop a
persuasive message.
	17.3	Employ effective techniques of using emotional appeal in a
persuasive speech.
	17.4	Adapt your persuasive message to receptive, neutral, and
unreceptive audiences.
	17.5	Identify and use strategies for effectively organizing a persuasive
speech.
“Persuasion,” said rhetoric scholar Donald C. Bryant, “is the process of adjust-
ing ideas to people and people to ideas.”1 To be an audience-centered persuasive
speaker is to use ethical and effective strategies to adjust your message so that
listeners will thoughtfully respond to your presentation. In this chapter, we will
discuss strategies that can enhance your credibility, help you develop logical ar-
guments, and use emotional appeals to speak to the hearts of your listeners. We
will also discuss how to adapt your specific message to your audience, and we
will end with suggestions for organizing your persuasive message.
Enhancing Your Credibility
17.1	 Identify and use strategies to improve your initial, derived, and
terminal credibility.
Recall that in Chapter 10, we discussed the importance of credibility. ­Credibility
is the audience’s perception of a speaker’s competence, trustworthiness,
and dynamism. There is a direct relationship between credibility and speech
17.1
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 372 11/13/14 2:40 PM
373
Enhancing Your Credibility 17.1
effectiveness: The more credible you are perceived as being by your listeners,
the more effective you will be as a persuasive communicator.
The importance to a speaker of a positive public image has been recognized
for centuries. As we noted in Chapter 16, Aristotle used the term ethos to refer to
a speaker’s credibility. He thought that to be credible, a public speaker should be
ethical, possess good character, have common sense, and be concerned for the
well-being of the audience. Aristotle’s speculations as to the factors that influ-
ence a speaker’s credibility have been generally supported by modern experi-
mental studies. Quintilian, a Roman teacher of public speaking, also believed
that an effective public speaker should be a person of good character. Quintil-
ian’s advice was that a speaker should be “a good person speaking well.”
But don’t get the idea that credibility is something that a speaker literally
possesses or lacks. Credibility is based on the listeners’ mind-set regarding the
speaker. Your listeners, not you, determine whether you have credibility or lack it.
Elements of Your Credibility
Credibility is not just a single factor or a single view of you on the part of your
audience. To be credible, you should be perceived as competent, trustworthy,
and dynamic.
Competence  A speaker who is informed, skilled, or knowledgeable about
his or her subject is one with competence.
When you give a speech, you will be more persuasive if you convince your
listeners that you are knowledgeable about your topic. If, for example, you say
it would be a good idea for everyone to have a medical checkup each year, your
listeners might mentally ask, “Why? What are your qualifications to make such
a proposal?” But if you support your conclusion with medical statistics showing
how having a physical exam each year leads to a dramatically prolonged life,
you enhance the credibility of your suggestion. Thus, one way to enhance your
competence is to cite credible evidence to support your point.
Trustworthiness  A second major factor that influences your audience’s
response to you is trustworthiness. You trust people whom you believe to be
honest; you can also predict what they will do or say in the future.
Earning an audience’s trust is not something that you can do simply by say-
ing, “Trust me.” You earn trust by demonstrating that you have had experience
dealing with the issues you talk about. Your listeners would be more likely to
trust your advice about how to tour Europe on $50 a day if you had been there
than they would if you took your information from a travel guide. Your trust-
worthiness may be suspect if you advocate something that will result in a direct
benefit to you. That’s why salespeople and politicians are often stereotyped as
being untrustworthy; if you do what they say, they will clearly benefit from a
sales commission if you buy a product, or gain power and position if you give
your vote.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 373 11/13/14 4:17 PM
374 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.1
Dynamism  A third factor in credibility is the speaker’s dynamism, or ­
energy.
Dynamism is often projected through delivery. Charisma is a form of dynamism.
A charismatic person possesses charm, talent, magnetism, and other qualities
that make the person attractive and energetic. Many people considered presi-
dents Franklin Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan charismatic speakers.
Phases of Your Credibility
Your credibility in the minds of your listeners evolves over time. Speakers typi-
cally establish their credibility in three phases: (1) initial credibility, (2) derived
credibility, and (3) terminal credibility.
Initial Credibility  The first phase is called initial credibility. This is the
impression of your credibility that your listeners have even before you speak.
Giving careful thought to your appearance and establishing eye contact before
you begin your talk will enhance both your confidence and your credibility. It
is also wise to prepare a brief description of your credentials and accomplish-
ments so that the person who introduces you can use it in his or her introduc-
tory remarks. Even if you are not asked for a statement beforehand, be prepared
with one.
Derived Credibility  The second phase in the evolution of ­
credibility
is called derived credibility. This is the perception the audience develops
about you after they meet you and as they see you present yourself and your
­
message. Most of this book presents principles and skills that help establish your
­
derived credibility as a speaker. Specific research-supported skills for enhancing
your credibility as you speak include establishing common ground with your
­
audience, supporting your key arguments with evidence, and presenting a well-
organized and well-delivered message.
•	 Establishing common ground. You establish common ground by indicating
in your opening remarks that you share the values and concerns of your
­
audience. To begin to persuade an audience that she understands why bud-
get cuts upset parents, a politician might speak of her own children.
•	 Support your key arguments with evidence. Having evidence to support your
persuasive conclusions strengthens your credibility.2
•	 Present a well-organized message. A well-organized message also enhances
your credibility as a competent and rational advocate.3 Regardless of the
organizational pattern you use, it is crucial to ensure that your message is
logically structured and uses appropriate internal summaries, signposts,
and enumeration of key ideas.
•	 Deliver your message well. For most North Americans, regular eye contact,
varied vocal inflection, and appropriate attire have positive influences on
your ability to persuade listeners to respond to your message.4 Why does
delivery affect how persuasive you are? Researchers suggest that when your
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 374 11/13/14 2:40 PM
375
Enhancing Your Credibility 17.1
listeners expect you to be a good speaker and you aren’t, they are less likely
to do what you ask them to do.5 So don’t violate their expectations by pre-
senting a poorly delivered speech.
Effective delivery also helps gain and maintain listener attention and ­
affects
whether listeners will like you.6 If you can arouse listeners’ attention and if
they like you, you’ll be more persuasive than you’ll be if you don’t gain their
­
attention and they don’t like you. Do speakers who use humor enhance their
credibility? There is some evidence that although using humor may contribute
to making listeners like you, humor does not have a major impact on ultimately
persuading listeners to support your message.7
Terminal Credibility  The last phase of credibility, called terminal
­credibility, or final credibility, is the perception of your credibility listeners have
when you finish your speech. The lasting impression you make on your audi-
ence is influenced by how you were first perceived (initial credibility) and what
you did as you presented your message (derived credibility). It is also influenced
by your behavior as, and immediately after, you conclude your speech. For ex-
ample, maintain eye contact with your audience as you deliver your speech con-
clusion. Also, don’t start to leave the lectern or the speaking area until you have
finished your closing sentence. Even if there is no planned question-and-answer
period following your speech, be ready to respond to questions from interested
listeners.
Quick Check
Enhancing Your Credibility
Initial Credibility
Carefully consider your appearance.
Establish eye contact before speaking.
Provide a summary of your credentials related to your topic.
Derived Credibility
Establish common ground.
Support arguments with evidence.
Organize your speech well.
Deliver your speech well.
Terminal Credibility
End with eye contact.
Be prepared for questions.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 375 11/13/14 2:40 PM
376 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
Using Logic and Evidence to
Persuade
17.2	 Use principles of effective logic and evidence to develop a persuasive
message.
“We need to cut taxes to improve the economy,” claimed the politician on a
Sunday-morning talk show. “The stock market has lost 300 points this month.
People aren’t buying things. A tax cut will put money in their pockets and give
the economy a boost.” In an effort to persuade reluctant members of her politi-
cal party to support a tax cut, this politician was using a logical argument sup-
ported with evidence that stock prices were dropping. As we noted in Chapter 5
when we discussed how to be a critical listener, logic is a formal system of rules
for making inferences. Because wise audience members will be listening, per-
suasive speakers need to give careful attention to the way they use logic to reach
a conclusion.
Logic is central to all persuasive speeches. Aristotle said that any persuasive
speech has two parts: First, you state your case. Second, you prove your case. In
essence, he was saying that you must present evidence and then use appropriate
reasoning and logic to lead your listeners to the conclusion you advocate. Proof
consists of evidence you offer, plus the conclusion you draw from it. ­
Evidence
is made up of the facts, examples, statistics, and expert opinions that you use
to support the points you wish to make. Reasoning is the process you follow to
draw a conclusion from evidence. The Sunday-morning talk show politician
reached a conclusion that a tax cut was necessary from the evidence that stock
prices had tumbled and people weren’t buying things. Let’s consider the two
key elements of proof in greater detail. Specifically, we will look more closely at
types of reasoning and ways of testing the quality of evidence.
Understanding Types of Reasoning
Developing well-reasoned arguments for persuasive messages has been im-
portant since antiquity. If your arguments are structured in a rational way, you
have a greater chance of persuading your listeners. There are three major ways
to structure an argument to reach a logical conclusion: inductively (including
reasoning by analogy and reasoning by sign), deductively, and causally. Let’s
examine each in detail.
Inductive Reasoning  Reasoning that arrives at a general conclusion
from specific instances or examples is known as inductive reasoning. Using this
classical approach, you reach a general conclusion based on specific examples,
facts, statistics, and opinions. You might not know for certain that the specific in-
stances prove that the conclusion is true, but you decide that in all probability, the
specific instances support the general conclusion. According to contemporary
17.2
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 376 11/13/14 2:40 PM
377
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 17.2
logicians, you reason inductively when you claim that an outcome is probably
true because of specific evidence.
For example, if you were giving a speech attempting to convince your au-
dience that foreign cars are not reliable, you might use inductive reasoning to
make your point. You could announce that you recently bought a foreign car
that gave you trouble. Your cousin also bought a foreign car that kept stalling on
the freeway. Finally, your English professor told you that her foreign car has bro-
ken down several times in the past few weeks. Based on these specific examples,
you ask your audience to agree with your general conclusion: Foreign cars are
unreliable.
As a persuasive speaker, your job is to construct a sound argument. That
means basing your generalization on evidence. When you listen to a persuasive
message, notice how the speaker tries to support his or her conclusion. The How
To box shows three questions you can use to judge the validity of a generalization
arrived at using inductive reasoning. Based on the answers to these three ­
questions,
the logic in the example of problematic foreign cars is not particularly sound. You
would need considerably more evidence to prove your point.
Reasoning By Analogy  Reasoning by analogy is a special type of induc-
tive reasoning. An analogy is a comparison. This form of inductive reasoning
compares one thing, person, or process with another to predict how something
will perform and respond. In previous chapters we’ve suggested that using an
analogy is an effective way to clarify ideas and enhance message interest.
When you observe that two things have a number of characteristics in com-
mon and that a certain fact about one is likely to be true of the other, you have
Test the Validity of Inductive Reasoning
Ask these three questions:
•	 Are there enough specific instances to support the conclusion?  Are three examples
of problems with foreign cars enough to prove your point that foreign cars are generally
­
unreliable? Of the several million foreign cars manufactured, three cars, especially if they are
of ­
different makes, are not a large sample. If those examples were supported by additional
­
statistical evidence that more than 50 percent of foreign-car owners complained of serious
engine malfunctions, the evidence would be more convincing.
•	 Are the specific instances typical?  Are the three examples you cite representative of all
­
foreign cars manufactured? How do you know? What are the data on the performance of
foreign cars? Also, are you, your cousin, and your professor typical of most car owners? The
three of you might be careless about routine maintenance of your autos.
•	 Are the instances recent?  If the foreign cars that you are using as examples of poor reliabil-
ity are more than three years old, you cannot reasonably conclude that today’s foreign cars are
unreliable products. Age alone could explain the poor performance of your sample.
How
To
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 377 11/13/14 2:40 PM
378 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
drawn an analogy, reasoning from one example to reach a conclusion about
the other. If you try to convince an audience that because laws against using a
cell phone while driving in a school zone have cut down on injuries to children
in Florida and Missouri, those laws should therefore be instituted in Kansas,
you are reasoning by analogy. You would also be reasoning by analogy if you
claimed that because capital punishment reduced crime in Brazil, it should be
used in the United States as well. But as with reasoning by generalization, there
are questions that you should ask to check the validity of your conclusions:
•	 Do the ways in which two things are alike outweigh the ways in which they are
­different? Can you compare the crime statistics of Brazil to those of the
United States and claim to make a valid comparison? Could other factors
besides the cell phone laws in Florida and Missouri account for the lower
automobile accident death rate? Maybe differences in speed limits in school
zones can account for the difference.
•	 Is the assertion true? Is it really true that capital punishment has deterred
crime in Brazil? You will need to give reasons the comparison you are mak-
ing is valid and evidence that will prove your conclusion true.
Reasoning By Sign  Reasoning by sign, another special type of inductive
reasoning, occurs when two things are so closely related that the existence of one
thing means that the other thing will happen. For example, white smoke billow-
ing from the chimney of the Sistine Chapel in Rome’s Vatican Square is a sign
that there is a new pope. A clap of thunder and dark, swirling clouds are signs of
rain. One specific sign, or presence of multiple signs, leads you to a conclusion
that something else has happened or will happen.
One student group observed that many students on campus were wearing
T-shirts promoting other college and university sports teams rather than the
teams on their home campus. They viewed the T-shirts of other teams as a sign
of student apathy, deflated school spirit, and disinterest in campus sports. To fix
the problem, the group wanted to ban students from wearing shirts promoting a
team other than the local campus team.
When you use or hear reasoning by sign, consider these questions:
•	 Is there a strong, predictive relationship between the sign and the asserted conclu-
sion? If white smoke always precedes the announcement of a new pope,
then there is a strong relationship in which the sign (white smoke) predicts
the conclusion (there is a new pope). Does the shirt someone wears (a sign)
always predict a lack of school spirit?
•	 Is there another explanation for the relationship between the sign and the asserted
conclusion? Simply because students wear shirts promoting another team,
does that mean students really don’t care about the home team? Perhaps the
students just couldn’t afford to buy new shirts.
•	 Are there multiple signs? Hearing only thunder may not mean it will rain,
but hearing thunder, seeing lightning and dark clouds, and feeling a sudden
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 378 11/13/14 2:40 PM
379
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 17.2
shift in the wind increase the accuracy of your conclusion that it will rain.
If the non-home-team-T-shirt-wearing students also didn’t attend the pre-
game pep rally or many didn’t show up for campus sports events, those
would be additional signs of student apathy.
Deductive Reasoning  According to a centuries-old perspective, rea-
soning from a general statement or principle to reach a specific conclusion is
called deductive reasoning. This is just the opposite of inductive reasoning.
Contemporary logic specialists add that when the conclusion is certain rather
than ­
probable, you are reasoning deductively. The certainty of your conclusion
is based on the validity or truth in the general statement that forms the basis of
your argument.
Deductive reasoning can be structured in the form of a syllogism. A
­
syllogism is a way of organizing an argument into three elements: a major
premise, a minor premise, and a conclusion:
•	 Major premise. To reach a conclusion deductively, you start with a gen-
eral statement that serves as the major premise. In a speech attempting to
convince your audience that the communication professor teaching your
public-speaking class is a top-notch teacher, you might use a deductive rea-
soning process. Your major premise is “All communication professors have
excellent teaching skills.”
•	 Minor premise. The minor premise is a more specific statement about an
­
example that is linked to the major premise. The minor premise in the argument
you are advancing is “John Smith, our teacher, is a communication professor.”
•	 Conclusion. The conclusion is based on the major premise and the more spe-
cific minor premise. The conclusion to our syllogism is “John Smith has ex-
cellent teaching skills.”
In reasoning deductively, you need to ensure that both the major premise
and the minor premise are true and can be supported with evidence. The per-
suasive power of deductive reasoning derives from the fact that the conclusion
cannot be questioned if the premises are accepted as true.
Here’s another example you might hear in a speech: Ann was trying to con-
vince the city council to refuse a building permit to Mega-Low-Mart, a large
chain discount store that wants to move into her town. She believed that the
new store would threaten her downtown clothing boutique. Here’s the deduc-
tive structure of the argument she advanced:
Major premise:	
Every time a large discount store moves into a
small community, the merchants in the downtown
area lose business and the town loses tax revenue
from downtown merchants.
Minor premise:	
Mega-Low-Mart is a large discount chain that
wants to build a store in our town.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 379 11/13/14 2:40 PM
380 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
Conclusion:	
If Mega-Low-Mart is permitted to open a store in
our town, the merchants in the downtown area will
lose business, and the city will lose tax revenue.
The strength of Ann’s argument rests on whether or not her major premise
is true. Does the arrival of a large discount chain store always, in fact, result in
a loss of business for and tax revenue from merchants in small towns? In con-
structing arguments for your persuasive messages, assess the soundness of the
major premise on which you build your argument. Likewise, when listening to a
persuasive pitch from someone using a deductive argument, critically evaluate
the accuracy of the major premise, using the questions in the How To box.
Although we have identified inductive and deductive reasoning as separate
types of reasoning, they are related; the general premise in deductive argument
is often reached by noting several examples that support the general premise.8
Identifying whether you are using inductive or deductive reasoning can help
you better analyze and assess your arguments.
Causal Reasoning  A third type of reasoning is called causal reasoning.
When you reason by cause, you relate two or more events in such a way as to
conclude that one or more of the events caused the others. For example, you
might argue that having unprotected sex causes the spread of sexually trans-
mitted diseases. When reasoning from cause, you suggest that one thing actu-
ally caused the other thing to occur. There are two ways to structure a causal
argument:
 1.	From cause to effect. One approach is to move from a known fact to a pre-
dicted result. You know, for example, that interest rates have increased in
Test the Truth of a Deductive Argument
•	 Is the major premise (general statement) true?  The power of deductive reasoning hinges in
part on whether your generalization is true. In our example about communication professors,
is it really true that all communication professors have excellent teaching skills? What evidence
do you have to support this statement?
•	 Is the minor premise (the particular statement) also true?  A syllogism can also collapse if your
minor premise is false. In our example, it is easy enough to verify that John Smith is a commu-
nication professor. But not all minor premises can be verified as easily. For example, it would
be difficult to prove the minor premise in this example:
All gods are immortal.
Zeus is a god.
Therefore, Zeus is immortal.
We can accept the major premise as true, because immortality is part of the definition of a
god. But proving that Zeus is a god would be very difficult.
How
To
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 380 11/13/14 2:40 PM
381
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 17.2
the past week. Therefore, you might argue that because the rates are increas-
ing, the Dow Jones Industrial Average will decrease. In this case, you move
from something that has occurred (rising interest rates) to something that
has not yet occurred (decrease in the Dow). Weather forecasters use the same
method of reasoning when they predict the weather. They base a conclusion
about tomorrow’s weather on what they know about today’s meteorological
conditions.
 2.	From effect to cause. A second way to frame a causal argument is to reason
backward, from known effect to unknown cause. You know, for example, that
a major earthquake has occurred (known effect). To explain this event, you
propose that the cause of the earthquake was a shift in a fault line ­
(unknown
cause). You cannot be sure of the cause, but you are certain of the effect.
A candidate for president of the United States might claim that the cause
of current high unemployment (known effect) is mismanagement by the
­
present administration (unknown cause). The candidate then constructs an
argument to prove that his assertion is accurate. To prove his case, he needs
to have evidence that the present administration mismanaged the economy.
The key to developing strong causal arguments is in the use of evidence
to link something known with something unknown. An understanding of
the appropriate use of evidence can enhance inductive, deductive, and causal
reasoning.
Table 17.1 summarizes the three types of reasoning we have discussed.
These logical, rational methods of reasoning, most of which evolved from clas-
sical Greek and Roman traditions of argument, are understood and expected by
most North American audiences. As we’ll see next, however, not all listeners
rely on the same methods.
Adapting Reasoning For A Culturally Diverse Audience  If a
good portion of your audience has a cultural background that is different from
your own, it’s wise not to assume that they will have the same assumptions
about what is logical and reasonable that you have.
Rhetoricians from the United States typically use a straightforward, factual-
inductive method of supporting ideas and reaching conclusions.9 They identify
facts and link them to support a specific proposition or conclusion. For example,
in a speech to prove that the government spends more money than it receives, a
speaker could cite year-by-year statistics on income and expenditures to docu-
ment the point. Not all cultures assume such a linear methodical approach to
supporting ideas and proving a point.10 Some cultures use a deductive pattern
of reasoning rather than an inductive pattern. They begin with a general premise
and then link it to a specific situation when they attempt to persuade listeners.
During several recent trips to Russia, your authors noticed that to argue that
communism was ineffective, many Russians started with a general assumption:
Communism didn’t work. Then they used this assumption to explain specific
current problems in areas such as transportation and education.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 381 11/13/14 2:40 PM
382 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
Middle Eastern cultures usually do not use standard inductive or deductive
structures. They are more likely to use narrative methods to persuade an audience.
They tell stories that evoke feelings and emotions and use extended analogies,
­
examples, and illustrations, allowing their listeners to draw their own conclusions
by inductive association.11 Although this text stresses the kind of inductive reason-
ing that will be persuasive to most North Americans, you might need to use alter-
native strategies if your audience is from another cultural tradition.
North Americans also like debates that involve a direct clash of ideas
and opinions. Our low-context culture encourages people to be more direct
and forthright in dealing with issues and disagreement than do high-context
­
cultures. People from high-context cultures, for example, may expect that
participants in debates will establish a personal relationship before debating
issues.
Supporting Your Reasoning with Evidence
You cannot persuade by simply stating a conclusion without proving it with evi-
dence. When attempting to persuade listeners, it is essential to make sure that
your evidence logically supports the inductive, deductive, or causal reasoning
you are using to reach your conclusion.
•	 Inductive. If you are using an inductive reasoning strategy (from spe-
cific ­
examples to a general conclusion), you need to make sure you have
enough facts, examples, statistics, and credible opinions to support your
conclusion.
Table 17.1  Comparing Types of Reasoning
  Inductive Reasoning Deductive Reasoning Causal Reasoning
Reasoning begins
with . . .
Specific examples A general statement Something known
Reasoning ends
with . . .
A general conclusion A specific conclusion A speculation about something
unknown occurring, based on
what is known
Conclusion of
reasoning is that
something is . . .
Probable or improbable True or false Likely or not likely
Goal of reasoning
is . . .
To reach a general conclusion or
discover something new
To reach a specific conclusion
by applying what is known
To link something known with
something unknown
Example When tougher drug laws went
into effect in Kansas City and
St. Louis, drug traffic was
reduced. Each city in the United
States should therefore institute
tougher drug laws because
there will be a decrease in drug
use.
Instituting tough drug laws in
medium-sized communities
results in diminished drug-
related crime. San Marcos,
Texas, is a medium-sized
community. San Marcos should
institute tough drug laws in order
to reduce drug-related crimes.
Since the 70-mile-per-hour
speed limit was reinstated, traffic
deaths have increased. The
increased highway speed has
caused an increase in highway
deaths.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 382 11/13/14 2:40 PM
383
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 17.2
•	 Deductive. If you reason deductively (from a generalization to a ­
specific
conclusion), you need evidence to document the truth of your initial
generalization.
•	 Causal. When developing an argument using causal reasoning, evidence is
vital to establish your message that one or more events caused something to
happen.
Evidence in persuasive speeches consists of facts, examples, statistics,
and expert opinions. (Recall that in Chapter 8 we discussed using these types
of ­
supporting materials in speeches.) Aristotle called logic logos, which means
“the word.” Using words as well as statistical information to develop logical
­
arguments can make your persuasive efforts more convincing. It can also clarify
your own thinking and help make your points clear to your listeners.
Facts  When using facts to persuade, make sure your fact is really a fact. A
fact is something that has been directly observed to be true or can be proved
to be true. The shape of the earth, the number of women university presidents,
and the winner of the 2014 Super Bowl have all been directly observed or
counted. Without direct observation or measurement, we can only make an
inference. An inference is a conclusion based on available evidence or par-
tial information. It’s a fact that sales of foreign-made cars are increasing in the
United States; it’s an inference that foreign-made cars are always the highest-
quality cars.
Examples  Examples are illustrations that are used to dramatize or clarify a
fact. For example, one speaker, in an effort to document the increased violence
in children’s television programs, told her audience, “Last Saturday morning, as
I watched cartoons with my daughter, I was shocked by the countless times we
saw examples of beatings and even the death of the cartoon characters in one
half-hour program.” The conclusion she wanted her audience to reach: Put an
end to senseless violence in children’s television programs.
Only valid, true examples can be used to help prove a point. A hypotheti-
cal example, one that is fabricated to illustrate or clarify a point, should not
be used to reach a conclusion. It should be used only to clarify. David encour-
aged his listeners to join him in an effort to clean up the San Marcos River. He
wanted to motivate his audience to help by asking them to “imagine bringing
their children to the river ten years from now. You see the river bottom littered
with cans and bottles.” His example, while effective in helping the audience
to visualize what might happen in the future, does not prove that the river
ecosystem will deteriorate. It only illustrates what might happen if action isn’t
taken.
Opinions  Opinions can serve as evidence if they are expressed by an ­
expert,
someone who can add credibility to your conclusion. The best opinions to
use in support of a persuasive argument are those expressed by someone
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 383 11/13/14 2:40 PM
384 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
who is known to be unbiased, fair, and accurate. If the U.S. Surgeon General
has ­
expressed an opinion regarding drug testing, his or her opinion would
be ­
helpful evidence. Even so, opinions are usually most persuasive if they
are combined with other evidence, such as facts or statistics that support the
­expert’s position.
Statistics A statistic is a number that is used to summarize several facts or
samples. In an award-winning speech, Jeffrey Jamison used statistics effectively
to document the serious problem of alkaline batteries polluting the environment.
He cited evidence from The New York Times documenting that “—each year we
are adding 150 tons of mercury, 130 tons of lead, and 170 tons of cadmium to
the environment.”12 Without these statistics, Jeffrey’s claim that alkaline batter-
ies are detrimental to the environment would not have been as potent. Again,
you may want to review the discussion on the appropriate use of statistics in
Chapter 8.
Does the type of evidence you use make a difference in whether your
­
listeners will support your ideas? One research study found that examples
and illustrations go a long way in helping to persuade listeners.13 Additional
­
research documents the clear power of statistical evidence to persuade.14 And
yet another research study concluded that using both statistics and specific
­
examples is especially effective in persuading listeners.15 Poignant examples
may touch listeners’ hearts, but statistical evidence appeals to their intellect.
Using Evidence Effectively
We’ve identified what evidence is and why it’s important to use evidence to sup-
port your conclusions. But what are the strategies for using evidence effectively?
Here are a few suggestions.16
Use Credible Evidence  Your listeners are more likely to respond to your
arguments when they believe the evidence you use is credible—from a trustwor-
thy, knowledgeable, and unbiased source. Remember, it’s the listener, not you,
who determines whether the evidence is credible.
One type of evidence that is especially powerful is reluctant testimony, a
statement by someone who has reversed his or her position on a given issue, or
a statement that is not in the speaker’s best interest. For example, at one point
the owner of a large construction company, who wanted the contract to build
a new dam, was in favor of building the new dam to create a water reservoir.
But after further thought, he changed his mind and now is against building the
dam. The reluctant testimony of that construction company owner would bol-
ster your argument that the dam is a financial boondoggle. Reluctant testimony
is especially effective with a skeptical audience; it demonstrates how another
person has changed his or her mind and implicitly suggests that listeners should
do the same.17
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 384 11/13/14 2:40 PM
385
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 17.2
Use New Evidence  By “new,” we don’t just mean recent, although contem-
porary evidence is often perceived to be more credible than is evidence that’s out
of date. But besides seeking up-to-date evidence, try to find evidence that the lis-
tener hasn’t heard before—evidence that’s new to the listener. You don’t want the
listener to think, “Oh, I’ve heard all of that before.” Audience members are more
likely to keep focusing on your message when they are learning something new.
Use Specific Evidence  “Many people will be hurt if we don’t do some-
thing now to stop global climate change,” said Julia. How many people will be
hurt? What precisely will happen to them? Julia would make her point more
effectively if she cited specific evidence that, for example, identified how many
homes would be lost as a result of rising ocean levels rather than just saying
“many people” or “a lot of people.”
Use Evidence To Tell A Story  Facts, examples, statistics, and opinions
may be credible, new, and specific—yet your evidence will be even more power-
ful if it fits together to tell a story to make your point. Besides listing the problems
that will occur because of global warming, Julia could personalize the evidence
by telling a story about how the rising ocean levels will hurt ­
individual families.
Using evidence to support a story adds emotional power to your ­
message and
makes your evidence seem less abstract.18
Use Evidence Appropriate To A Diverse Audience  Because we
­
believe that messages should be audience-centered rather than source-centered,
we suggest that you consider your listeners to determine the kind of evidence
that will be the most convincing to them. What may be convincing evidence to
you may not be such an obvious piece of evidence for others.
According to intercultural communication scholars Myron Lustig and
Jolene Koester, “There are no universally accepted standards about what consti-
tutes evidence.”19 They suggest that for some Muslim and Christian audiences,
parables or stories are a dramatically effective way to make a point. A story is
told and a principle is derived from the lesson of the story.
For most North Americans and Europeans, a superior form of evidence is
an observed fact. A study by two communication scholars reported that both
African Americans and Hispanic Americans found statistical evidence more per-
suasive than stories alone.20 Statistics, said the respondents, are more believable
and verifiable; stories can more easily be modified.
Stories, or illustrations, may be problematic for other reasons as well. As we
noted in Chapter 16, eyewitness testimony is not perceived as credible in some
African cultures. It’s believed that if you speak up to report what you saw, you
may have a particular slant on the event and, therefore, what you have to say
may not be believable.21
If you are uncertain whether your listeners will perceive your evidence as
valid and reliable, you could test your evidence on a small group of people who
will be in your audience before you address the entire group.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 385 11/13/14 2:40 PM
386 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
Avoiding Faulty Reasoning
We have emphasized the importance of developing sound, logical arguments
supported with appropriate evidence. You have an ethical responsibility to use
your skill to construct arguments that are well supported with logical reason-
ing and sound evidence. Unfortunately, not all people who try to persuade
you will use sound arguments to get you to vote for them, buy their product,
or donate money to their cause. Many persuaders use inappropriate techniques
called fallacies. A fallacy is false reasoning that occurs when someone attempts
to persuade without adequate evidence or with arguments that are irrelevant or
inappropriate. You will be both a better and more ethical speaker and a better
listener if you are aware of the following fallacies.
Causal Fallacy  The Latin term for the causal fallacy is post hoc, ergo propter
hoc, which translates as “after this, therefore, because of this.” A causal fallacy
involves making a faulty causal connection. Simply because one event fol-
lows another does not mean that the two are related. If you ­
declared that your
school’s football team won this time because you sang your school song before
the game, you would be guilty of a causal fallacy. There are undoubtedly other
factors that explain why your team won, such as good preparation or facing a
weaker opposing team. For something to be a cause, it has to have the power to
bring about a result. “That howling storm last night knocked down the tree in
our backyard” is a logical causal explanation for the noise that disturbed your
sleep and the mess you found in the morning.
Here are more examples of causal fallacies:
The increased earthquake and hurricane activity is caused by the increase
in violence and war in our society.
As long as you wear this lucky rabbit’s foot, you will never have an auto-
mobile accident.
In each instance, there is not enough evidence to support the cause-and-­
effect conclusion.
Bandwagon Fallacy  Someone who argues that “everybody thinks it’s a
good idea, so you should too” is using the bandwagon fallacy. Simply because
“everyone” is “jumping on the bandwagon,” or supporting a particular point
of view, does not make the point of view correct. Sometimes speakers use the
bandwagon fallacy in more subtle ways in their efforts to persuade:
Everybody knows that talk radio is our primary link to a free and demo-
cratic society.
Most people agree that we spend too much time worrying about the future
of Medicare.
Beware of sweeping statements that include you and others without offer-
ing any evidence that the speaker has solicited opinions.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 386 11/13/14 2:40 PM
387
Using Logic and Evidence to Persuade 17.2
Either/Or Fallacy  Someone who argues that there are only two ap-
proaches to a problem is trying to oversimplify the issue by using the either/
or fallacy. “It’s either vote for higher property taxes or close the library,” as-
serts Daryl at a public hearing on tax increases. Such a statement ignores all
other possible solutions to a complex problem. When you hear someone sim-
plifying all available options by saying it’s either this or that, you should be
on guard for the either/or fallacy. Rarely is any issue as simple as a choice be-
tween two alternatives. The following are examples of inappropriate either/
or reasoning:
Either we make sure that television violence is reduced or we will have an
increase in child and spouse abuse.
Either more people start volunteering their time to work for this commu-
nity or your taxes will increase.
Hasty Generalization  A person who reaches a conclusion from too little
evidence or nonexistent evidence is making a hasty generalization. For exam-
ple, that one person became ill after eating the meat loaf in the cafeteria does not
mean that everyone eating in the cafeteria will develop food poisoning. Here are
some additional hasty generalizations:
It’s clear that our schools can’t educate children well—my niece went to
school for six years and she still can’t read at her grade level.
The city does a terrible job of taking care of the elderly—my grandmother
lives in a city-owned nursing home, and the floors there are always filthy.
Ad Hominem  Also known as attacking the person, an ad hominem (Latin
for “to the man”) approach involves attacking irrelevant characteristics of the
person who is proposing an idea rather than attacking the idea itself. A state-
ment such as “We know Janice’s idea won’t work because she has never had
a good idea yet” does not really deal with the idea, which may be valid. Don’t
dismiss an idea solely because you have been turned against the person who
presented it. Here are examples of ad hominem attacks:
She was educated in a foreign county and could not possibly have good
ideas for improving education in our community.
Tony is an awful musician and is not sensitive enough to chair the parking
committee.
Red Herring The red herring fallacy is used when someone attacks an is-
sue by using irrelevant facts or arguments as distractions. This fallacy gets its
name from an old trick of dragging a red herring across a trail to divert any dogs
that may be following. Speakers use a red herring when they want to distract an
audience from the real issues. For example, a politician who has been accused
of taking bribes while in office calls a press conference. During the press confer-
ence, he talks about the evils of child pornography rather than addressing the
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 387 11/13/14 2:40 PM
388 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.2
charge against him. He is using the red herring technique to divert attention
from the real issue—did he or did he not take the bribe? Consider another red
herring argument from a speech against gun control: The real problem is that
pawnshops that sell guns are controlled by the Mafia.
Appeal To Misplaced Authority  When ads use baseball players to en-
dorse automobiles and TV stars to promote a political candidate, airline, or hotel
chain, we are faced with the fallacious appeal to misplaced authority. Although
we have great respect for these people in their own fields, they are no more ex-
pert than we are in the areas they are promoting. As both a public speaker and a
listener, you must recognize what is valid expert testimony and what is not. For
example, a physicist who speaks on the laws of nature or the structure of mat-
ter could reasonably be accepted as an expert. But when the physicist speaks on
politics, the opinion expressed is not that of an expert and is no more significant
than your own. The following examples are appeals to misplaced authority:
Former Congressman Smith endorses the new art museum, so every busi-
ness should get behind it too.
Katie Couric thinks this cookie recipe is the best, so you will like it too.
Non Sequitur  When you argue that a new parking garage should not be
built on campus because the grass has not been mowed on the football field for
three weeks, you are guilty of a non sequitur (Latin for “it does not follow”).
Grass growing on the football field has nothing to do with the parking problem.
Your conclusion simply does not follow from your statement. The following are
examples of non sequitur conclusions:
We should not give students condoms, because TV has such a pervasive
influence on our youth today.
You should endorse me for Congress because I have three children.
Quick Check
Avoid These Fallacies
•	 Causal: Assuming a faulty cause-and-effect relationship
•	 Bandwagon: Assuming that because others approve, conclusion must be valid
•	 Either/Or: Oversimplifying the options to either one thing or the other
•	 Hasty Generalization: Reaching a conclusion without adequate evidence
•	 Ad Hominem: Critiquing the person rather than the merit of the idea presented
•	 Red Herring: Using irrelevant information to distract from the real issue
•	 Appeal to Misplaced Authority: Using the non-expert testimony of someone
who does not have appropriate credentials
•	 Non Sequitur: Using a conclusion that does not logically follow the information
presented
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 388 11/13/14 2:40 PM
389
Using Emotion to Persuade 17.3
Using Emotion to Persuade
17.3	 Employ effective techniques of using emotional appeal in a persuasive
speech.
Effective speakers know how to use emotion to make their point. Note these
three evocative moments in classic speeches:22
•	 In his inaugural address, delivered with perfect timing, President John F.
Kennedy inspiringly intoned, “And so, my fellow Americans, ask not what
your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country. My
fellow citizens of the world, ask not what America will do for you, but what
together we can do for the freedom of man.”
•	 After being dismissed from his command duties by President Harry
­
Truman, a still popular General Douglas MacArthur ended his poignant
farewell speech to Congress by saying, “Old soldiers never die; they just
fade away. And like the old soldier of that ballad, I now close my military
career and just fade away.”
•	 When encouraging the British people to be valiant during World War II,
Prime Minister Winston Churchill resolutely declared, “We shall go on to
the end, we shall fight in France, we shall fight on the seas and oceans, we
shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air, we shall
defend our island, whatever the cost may be, we shall fight on the beaches,
we shall fight on the landing grounds, we shall fight in the fields and the
streets, we shall fight on the hills; we shall never surrender.”
Great moments in memorable speeches occur when both the minds and
hearts are engaged. Understanding how messages evoke emotions can help you
develop appropriate emotional appeals. Emotional response theory suggests
that emotional responses can be classified along three dimensions: pleasure,
arousal, and dominance.23
•	 From pleasure to displeasure. Pleasurable stimuli consist of such things as
­
images of smiling, healthy babies or daydreams about winning millions in a
sweepstakes. Stimuli that cause displeasure may be TV news stories of child
abuse or dreadful images of terrorism.
•	 From arousal to nonarousal. You become aroused emotionally by seeing a
snake in your driveway, or you may be lulled into a state of nonarousal by
a boring lecture.
•	 From dominance to powerlessness. When thinking about the destructive force
of nuclear weapons or the omnipotence of God, you may feel insignificant
and powerless. Or perhaps you feel a sense of power when you imagine
yourself conducting a symphony or winning an election.
These three dimensions—pleasure, arousal, and dominance—are believed
to form the bases of all emotional responses. Emotional response theory predicts
17.3
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 389 11/13/14 2:40 PM
390 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.3
that if listeners feel pleasure and are also aroused by something, such as a politi-
cal candidate or a product, they will tend to form a favorable view of the can-
didate or product. A listener’s feeling of being dominant has to do with being
in control and having permission to behave as he or she wishes. A listener who
feels dominant is more likely to respond to the message.
As a public speaker trying to sway your listeners to your viewpoint, your
job is to ethically use emotional appeals to achieve your goal. If you wanted
to persuade your listeners that capital punishment should be banned, you
would try to arouse feelings of displeasure to turn the listeners against capital
­
punishment. Advertisers selling soft drinks typically strive to arouse feelings of
pleasure in those who think of their product. Smiling people, upbeat music, and
good times are usually part of the formula for selling soda pop.
Tips for Using Emotion to Persuade
Although emotional response theory may help you to understand how emotions
work, as a public speaker your key concern is “How can I ethically use emotional
appeals to achieve my persuasive purpose?” Let’s consider several methods.
Use Concrete Examples That Help Your Listeners To Visualize
What You Describe  This speaker used a vivid description of the devas-
tation caused by a tornado in Saragosa, Texas, to evoke strong emotions and
persuade listeners to take proper precautions when a storm warning is sounded.
The town is no more. No homes in the western Texas town remain stand-
ing. The church where twenty-one people perished looks like a heap of
twisted metal and mortar. A child’s doll can be seen in the street. The
owner, four-year-old Maria, will no longer play with her favorite toy;
she was killed along with five of her playmates when the twister roared
through the elementary school.
Use Emotion-Arousing Words  Words and phrases can trigger emo-
tional responses in your listeners. Mother, flag, freedom, and slavery are among
a large number of emotionally loaded words. Patriotic slogans, such as “Re-
member Pearl Harbor” and “Remember 9/11,” can produce strong emotional
responses.24
Use Nonverbal Behavior To Communicate Your Emotional
­Response  The great Roman orator Cicero believed that if you want your lis-
teners to experience a certain emotion, you should first model that emotion for
them. If you want an audience to feel anger at a particular law or event, you
must display anger and indignation in your voice, movement, and gesture. As
we have noted, delivery plays the key role in communicating your emotional
­
responses. When you want your audience to become excited about and inter-
ested in your message, you must communicate that excitement and interest
through your delivery.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 390 11/13/14 2:40 PM
391
Using Emotion to Persuade 17.3
Keep in mind that listeners’ cultures influence how receptive they are to a
message and to a speaker’s presentation style. Some Latin American ­
listeners,
for ­
example, expect speakers to express more emotion and passion when
speaking than North American listeners are accustomed to. The best way to
assess the preferred speaking style of an audience that is not familiar to you
is to observe other successful speakers addressing the audience you will face.
Or talk with ­
audience members before you speak to identify expectations and
­communication-style preferences.
Use Visual Images To Evoke Emotions  In addition to nonverbal
­
expressions, pictures or images of emotion-arousing scenes can amplify your
speech. An image of a lonely homeowner looking out over his waterlogged
house following a ravaging flood can communicate his sense of despair with
greater impact that words alone. In contrast, a photo of a refugee mother and
child reunited after an enforced separation can communicate the true meaning
of joy. You can use similar images as visual aids to evoke your audience’s emo-
tions, both positive and negative. Remember, however, that when you use visual
images, you have the same ethical responsibilities as when you use verbal forms
of support: Make sure that your image is from a credible source and that it has
not been altered or taken out of context.
Use Appropriate Metaphors and Similes  A metaphor is an implied
comparison between two things. The person who says, “Our lives are quilts
upon which we stitch the patterns of our character. If you don’t pay attention to
the ethical dimension of the decisions you make, you will be more likely to make
a hideous pattern in your life quilt,” is using a metaphor. A simile makes a direct
comparison between two things using the word like or as. Here’s an ­
example of
a simile: “Not visiting your academic counselor regularly is like being a gam-
bler in a high-stakes poker game; you’re taking a big chance that you’re tak-
ing the right courses.” Several research studies have found that speakers who
use ­
appropriate and interesting metaphors and similes are more persuasive
than those who don’t use such stylistic devices.25 Using metaphors and similes
can create a fresh, emotional perspective on a persuasive point; they can both
­
enhance your credibility and develop an emotional image in a way that non-
metaphorical language cannot.26
Use Appropriate Fear Appeals  The threat that harm will come to your
listeners unless they follow your advice is an appeal to fear. As discussed in
Chapter 16, listeners can be motivated to change their behavior if appeals to fear
are used appropriately. Research suggests that high fear arousal (“You will be
killed in an auto accident unless you wear a safety belt”) is more effective than
moderate or low appeals, if you are a highly credible speaker.27
Consider Using Appeals To Several Emotions  Appealing to
the fears and anxieties of your listeners is one of the most common types of
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 391 11/13/14 2:40 PM
392 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.3
emotional appeals used to persuade, but you could also elicit several other emo-
tions to help achieve your persuasive goal.
•	 Hope. Listeners could be motivated to respond to the prospect of a brighter
tomorrow. When Franklin Roosevelt said, “The only thing we have to fear is
fear itself,” he was invoking hope for the future, as was President Obama in
his upbeat 2008 campaign phrase, “Yes, we can!”
•	 Pride. When a politician says, “It’s time to restore our nation’s legacy as a
beacon of freedom for all people,” she is appealing to national pride. The
appeal to pride is to invoke feelings of pleasure and satisfaction based on
accomplishing something important. A persuasive appeal to achieve a goal
based on pride in oneself or one’s country, state, or community can be very
powerful.
•	 Courage. Challenging your audience to take a bold stand or to step away
from the crowd can emotionally charge your listeners to take action. Refer-
ring to courageous men and women as role models can help to motivate
your listeners to take similar actions. Patrick Henry’s famous “Give me
­
liberty, or give me death!” speech appealed to his audience to take a coura-
geous stand on the issues before them.
•	 Reverence. The appeal to the sacred and the revered can be an effective
way to motivate. Sacred traditions, revered institutions, and cherished
and ­
celebrated individuals can inspire your audience to change or rein-
force ­
attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior. The late Mother Teresa, holy
­
writings, and the school your listeners attended are examples of peo-
ple, things, and institutions that your listeners may perceive as sacred.
As an audience-­
centered speaker, however, you need to remember that
what may be sacred to one individual or audience may not be sacred to
another.
Tap Audience Members’ Beliefs In Shared Myths  Often people
talk about a “myth” as something that is factually untrue. The Easter Bunny,
the Tooth Fairy, and Santa Claus are often labeled as myths. But in a rhetorical
sense, a myth is a belief held in common by a group of people and based on their
­
values, cultural heritage, and faith.
A myth may be factual—or it may be based on a partial truth that a group
of people believes to be true. Myths are the “big stories” that give meaning and
coherence to a group of people or a culture. The myth of the Old West is that
the pioneers of yesteryear were strong, adventurous people who sacrificed their
lives in search of a better tomorrow. The myth of the 1950s was that U.S. families
were prosperous and lived like Ward and June Cleaver and their sons, Wally and
“The Beaver,” in the TV program Leave It to Beaver. Religious myths are beliefs
shared by a group of people of faithful disciples. So a myth is not necessarily
false—it is a belief that a group of people share, one that provides emotional
support for the way they view the world.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 392 11/13/14 2:40 PM
393
Using Emotion to Persuade 17.3
As a public speaker, you can draw on the myths that you and your audience
members share to provide emotional and motivational support for your mes-
sage. Referring to a shared myth is a way to identify with your listeners and help
them see how your ideas support their ideas; it can help you develop a common
bond with audience members. Politicians use myth when they show pictures
of themselves surrounded by their families. The underlying myth is “I cherish
what you cherish: to live in a country that supports and nurtures the family val-
ues we hold dear.”
In trying to convince his listeners to vote, Jason argued, “We can’t let down
those who fought for our freedom. We must vote to honor those who died for
the privilege of voting that we enjoy today.” He was drawing on the power-
ful myth that people have died for our freedoms. To gain parent support for a
new high school, Cynthia said, “Our grandparents and great-grandparents lived
through the Great Depression and the world wars of the past century so that
we can send our children to the best public schools in the world. Vote for the
new high school.” She was appealing to the myth that the previous generation
sacrificed, which gave us a responsibility to sacrifice for our children. Again, we
emphasize that myth does not mean “false” or “made up.” People really did die
for our freedom, and our grandparents and great-grandparents did live through
the Depression and two tragic world wars; a myth is powerful because the audi-
ence knows that those events occurred.
Appealing directly or indirectly to the commonly held myths of an
­
audience is a powerful way to evoke emotional support for your message.
But as with any form of support, especially emotional support, you have
an ­
ethical responsibility to use this strategy wisely and not to exploit your
listeners.
Using Emotional Appeals: Ethical Issues
Regardless of which emotions you use to motivate your audience, you have
an obligation to be ethical and forthright. Making false claims, misusing
­
evidence to arouse emotions, or relying only on emotions without any evi-
dence to support a conclusion violates ethical standards of effective public
speaking.
A demagogue is a speaker who attempts to gain power or control over
­
others by using impassioned emotional pleas and appealing to ­
listeners’
­
prejudices. The word demagogue comes from the Greek word demagogos,
­
meaning “popular leader.” Speakers who become popular by substituting
­
emotion and fallacies for well-supported reasoning are guilty of ­
demagoguery.
As we ­
discussed in Chapter 4, during the early 1950s, anti-communist
­
Wisconsin ­
Senator Joseph McCarthy’s unethical use of fear appeals backed by
little ­
evidence undermined his credibility and earned him a reputation as a
demagogue. You have an ­
ethical responsibility not to misuse emotional appeals
when persuading others.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 393 11/13/14 2:40 PM
394 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.4
Strategies for Adapting Ideas to
People and People to Ideas
17.4	 Adapt your persuasive message to receptive, neutral, and unreceptive
audiences.
We opened this chapter with Donald C. Bryant’s pithy definition of rhetoric as
“the process of adjusting ideas to people and people to ideas.”28 His description
of the rhetorical process gets at the heart of what an effective persuader does—
he or she ethically adapts the message and delivery to create agreement.
As we have observed several times before, an early task in the public-
speaking process is to analyze your audience. This is particularly important
in persuasion. Audience members are not just sitting there waiting to respond
to every suggestion a speaker makes. Instead, audience members may hold
differing views of you and your subject. Your task is to find out whether there
is a prevailing viewpoint held by a majority of your listeners. If they are gen-
erally friendly toward you and your ideas, you need to design your speech
differently from the way you would if your listeners were neutral, apathetic,
or hostile.
Research studies as well as seasoned public speakers can offer some use-
ful suggestions to help you adapt your approach to your audience. We will dis-
cuss three general responses your audience may have: receptive, neutral, and
unreceptive.
Persuading the Receptive Audience
It is always a pleasure to face an audience that already supports you and your
message. In speaking to a receptive group, you can explore your ideas in greater
17.4
Quick Check
Tips for Using Emotion to Persuade
•	 Use concrete examples.
•	 Use emotion-arousing words.
•	 Use visual images.
•	 Use appropriate metaphors and similes.
•	 Use appropriate fear appeals.
•	 Appeal to a variety of emotions.
•	 Communicate emotions nonverbally.
•	 Tap into shared myths.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 394 11/13/14 2:40 PM
395
Strategies for Adapting Ideas to People and People to Ideas 17.4
depth than otherwise. Here are some suggestions that can help you to make the
most of that kind of speaking opportunity.
Identify With Your Audience  To establish common ground with her
audience of fellow students, Rita told them, “Just like most of you, I struggle to
pay my way through college. That’s why I support expanding the campus work-
study program.” Like Rita, if you are a college student speaking to other college
students with similar backgrounds and pressures, point to your similar back-
grounds and struggles. Emphasize the similarities between you and your audi-
ence. What other common interests do you have? The introductory portion of
your speech is a good place to mention your common interests and background.
Clearly State Your Speaking Objective  When speaking to a group
of her campaign workers, mayoral candidate Maria Hernandez stated early in
her speech, “My reason for coming here today is to ask each of you to volunteer
three hours a week to help me become the next mayor of our city.” We have
stressed several times how important it is to provide an overview of your major
point or purpose. This is particularly so when speaking to a group who will sup-
port your point of view.29
Tell Your Audience Exactly What You Want Them To Do Besides
telling your listeners what your speaking objective is, you can also tell them how
you expect them to respond to your message. Be explicit in directing your listen-
ers’ behavior.
Ask Listeners For An Immediate Show Of Support  Asking for an
immediate show of support helps to cement the positive response you have de-
veloped during your speech. For example, Christian evangelists usually speak
to favorable audiences. Evangelist Billy Graham, who spoke to more people in
live public-speaking situations than anyone else in the twentieth century, always
asked those who supported his Christian message to come forward at the end of
his sermon.
Use Emotional Appeals Effectively  When the audience already sup-
ports your position, you need not spend a great deal of time on lengthy, detailed
explanations or factual information. You can usually assume that your listeners
already know much of that material. You are more likely to move a favorable
audience to action with strong emotional appeals while also reminding them of
the evidence that supports your conclusion.
Make It Easy For Your Listeners To Act  It is a good idea not only to
tell your listeners precisely what you want them to do and ask for an immediate
response, but also to make sure that what you’re asking them to do is clear and
easy. If you’re asking them to write or email someone, hand out postcards that
are already addressed to the recipient or distribute an email address printed on
a card for handy reference. If you want listeners to call someone, make sure each
person has the phone number—it’s even better if you can give a toll-free number.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 395 11/13/14 2:40 PM
396 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.4
Persuading the Neutral Audience
Think how many lectures you go to with an attitude of indifference. Probably
quite a few. Many audiences will fall somewhere between wildly enthusiastic
and ­
unreceptive; they will simply be neutral or indifferent. They may be neutral
because they don’t know much about your topic or because they just can’t make
up their minds whether to support your point of view. They may also be indif-
ferent because they don’t see how the topic or issue affects them. Regardless of
the reason for your listeners’ indifference, your challenge is to make them inter-
ested in your message. Let’s look at some approaches to gaining their attention
and keeping their interest.
Capture Your Listeners’ Attention Early In Your Speech “Bill
Farmer died last year, but he’s about to fulfill his lifelong dream of going into
space.”30 In a speech about the high cost of funerals, Karmen’s provocative
opening statement effectively captures the attention of her listeners.
Refer To Beliefs That Many Listeners Share  When speaking to a
neutral audience, identify common concerns and values that you plan to ad-
dress. Martin Luther King Jr.’s “Dream” speech (Appendix B) includes refer-
ences to his listeners’ common beliefs.
Relate Your Topic Not Only To Your Listeners But Also To Their
Families, Friends, and Loved Ones  You can capture your ­listeners’ inter-
est by appealing to the needs of people they care about. Parents will be interested
in ideas and policies that affect their children. People are generally interested in
matters that may affect their friends, neighbors, and others with whom they iden-
tify, such as members of their own religion or economic or ­
social class.
Be Realistic About What You Can Accomplish  Don’t overestimate
the response you may receive from a neutral audience. People who start with an
attitude of indifference are probably not going to become as enthusiastic as you
are after hearing just one speech. Persuasion does not occur all at once or on a
first hearing of arguments.
Persuading the Unreceptive Audience
One of the biggest challenges in public speaking is to persuade audience mem-
bers who are against you or your message. If they are hostile toward you per-
sonally, your job is to seek ways to enhance your credibility and persuade them
to listen to you. If they are unreceptive to your point of view, there are several
approaches that you can use to encourage them to listen to you.
Don’t Immediately Announce That You Plan To Change Their
Minds  Paul wondered why his opening sales pitch (“Good morning. I plan
to convince you to purchase this fine set of knives at a cost to you of only $250”)
was not greeted enthusiastically. Immediately and bluntly telling your listeners
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 396 11/13/14 2:40 PM
397
Strategies for Adapting Ideas to People and People to Ideas 17.4
that you plan to change their opinions can make them defensive. It is usually
better to take a more subtle approach when announcing your persuasive intent.31
Begin Your Speech By Noting Areas Of Agreement Before You
Discuss Areas Of Disagreement  In addressing the school board, one
community member began his persuasive effort to convince board members
they should not raise taxes by stating, “I think each of us here can agree on one
common goal: We want the best education for our children.” Once you help your
audience understand that there are issues on which you agree (even if only that
the topic you will discuss is controversial), your listeners may be more attentive
when you explain your position.
Don’t Expect A Major Shift In Attitude From A Hostile
­Audience  Set a realistic limit on what you can achieve. Remember our
discussion of social judgment theory in Chapter 16, which suggested that
­
listeners fall into three latitudes of reaction to persuasive messages: acceptance,
­
noncommitment, or rejection. You may not be able to move hostile listeners out
of the latitude of rejection of your message. A realistic goal might be to have
your ­
listeners hear you out and at least consider some of your points.
Acknowledge The Opposing Points Of View That Members Of
Your Audience May Hold  Summarize the reasons individuals may op-
pose your point of view. Doing this communicates that you at least understand
the issues.32 Your listeners will be more likely to listen to you if they know that
you understand their viewpoint. Of course, after you acknowledge the oppos-
ing point of view, you will need to cite evidence and use arguments to refute the
opposition and support your conclusion. Early in his speech to a neighborhood
group about the possibility of building a new airport near their homes, City Man-
ager Anderson acknowledged, “I am aware that a new airport brings ­
unwanted
changes to a neighborhood. Noise and increased traffic are not the type of chal-
lenges you want near your homes.” He went on to identify the ­
actions the city
would take to minimize the problems a new airport would cause.
Establish Your Credibility  Being thought credible is always an
­
important goal of a public speaker, and it is especially important in talking to
an unreceptive audience. Let your audience know about the experience, interest,
knowledge, and skill that give you special insight into the issues at hand.
Consider Making Understanding Rather Than Advocacy Your
Goal  Sometimes your audience disagrees with you because its members just
don’t understand your point. Or they may harbor a misconception about you
and your message. For example, if your listeners think that AIDS is transferred
through kissing or other casual contact rather than through unprotected sexual
contact, you will first have to acknowledge their beliefs and then construct a
sound argument to show how inaccurate their assumptions are. To change mis-
conceptions and enhance accurate understanding, experienced speakers use the
four-part strategy described in the How To box.33
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 397 11/13/14 2:40 PM
398 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.5
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive
Messages
17.5	 Identify and use strategies for effectively organizing a persuasive
speech.
Is there one best way to organize a persuasive speech? The answer is no. Specific
approaches to organizing speeches depend on audience, message, and desired
objective. But how you organize your speech does have a major effect on your
listeners’ response to your message.
Research suggests that there are some general principles to keep in mind
when preparing your persuasive message:34
•	 If you feel that your audience may be hostile to your point of view, advance your
strongest arguments first. If you save your best argument for last, your
­
audience might have already stopped listening.
•	 Do not bury key arguments and evidence in the middle of your message. Your
­
listeners are more likely to remember the information that is presented first
17.5
Correct an Audience’s Misconceptions
How
To
Step
	 1.	 Summarize the common
­misconceptions.
	 2.	 State why these misconceptions
may seem reasonable. Tell your
listeners why it is logical for them
to hold that view, or identify
“facts” they may have heard that
would lead them to their current
­conclusion.
	 3.	 Dismiss the misconceptions.
­
Provide sound, credible evidence to
support your point. (In this ­
example
you would probably cite two or
three specific medical studies.)
	 4.	 State the accurate information
that you want your audience to
remember.
Example
Many people think that AIDS can be transmitted
through casual contact such as kissing or that
it can easily be transmitted by your dentist or
­physician.
Since AIDS is such a highly contagious disease,
it may seem reasonable to think it can be
­
transmitted through such casual contact.
In fact, countless medical studies have shown
that it is virtually impossible to be infected with the
AIDS virus unless you have unprotected sexual
contact or use unsterilized hypodermic needles
that have also been used by someone who has
AIDS.
According to recent research, the most ­
common
factor contributing to the spread of AIDS is
­unprotected sex.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 398 11/13/14 2:40 PM
399
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive Messages 17.5
and last.35 In speaking to his fraternity about the dangers of drunk driving,
Frank wisely began his speech with his most powerful evidence: The lead-
ing cause of death among college-age males is alcohol-related automobile
accidents. He got their attention with this sobering fact.
•	 If you want your listeners to take some action, it is best to tell them what you want
them to do at the end of your speech. If you call for action in the middle of your
speech, it won’t have the same power it would have in your conclusion.
You should also tailor your calls to action to the cultural preferences of your
audience. In some high-context cultures, such as Japan and China, you can
imply what you’d like your listeners to do rather than spell out the precise
action explicitly. In a low-context culture such as the United States, listeners
may generally expect you to state more directly the action you’d like them
to take.
•	 When you think your listeners are well informed and are familiar with the disadvan-
tages of your proposal, it is usually better to present both sides of an issue, rather
than just the advantages of the position you advocate. If you don’t acknowledge
arguments your listeners have heard, they will probably think about them
anyway.
•	 Make reference to counterarguments and then refute them with evidence and logic.
It may be wise to compare your proposal with an alternative proposal,
­
perhaps one offered by someone else. By comparing and contrasting your
solution with another recommendation, you can show how your proposal
is better.36
•	 Adapt organization to the culture of your audience. Most North Americans tend to
like a well-organized message with a clear, explicit link between the ­
evidence
used and the conclusion drawn. North Americans are also comfortable with
a structure that focuses on a problem and then offers a solution or a message
in which causes are identified and the effects are specified. ­
Audiences in the
Middle East, however, would expect less formal structure and greater use
of a narrative style of message development. The audience either infers the
point or the speaker may conclude by making the point clear. Being indirect
or implicit may sometimes be the best persuasive strategy.
We discussed ways of organizing speeches in Chapter 9, but there are spe-
cial ways to organize persuasive speeches. Here we present four organizational
patterns: problem–solution, refutation, cause and effect, and the motivated
sequence.
Problem–Solution
The most basic organizational pattern for a persuasive speech is to make the
audience aware of a problem and then present a solution that clearly solves
it. Almost any problem can be phrased in terms of something you want more
of or less of. The problem–solution pattern works best when a clearly evident
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 399 11/13/14 2:40 PM
400 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.5
problem can be documented and a solution can be proposed to deal with the
evils of the well-documented problem.
When you are speaking to an apathetic audience or when listeners are not
aware that a problem exists, a problem–solution pattern works nicely. Your chal-
lenge will be to provide ample evidence to document that your perception of the
problem is accurate. The Sample Persuasive Speech in this chapter shows how
Texas State University student Colter Ray met this challenge. You’ll also need to
convince your listeners that the solution that you advocate is the most appropri-
ate one to resolve the problem.
You Are What You Eat: Why You Should Eat
Grass-Fed Organic Beef
Colter Ray, Texas State University37
Have you ever thought where your food comes from? And I’m not talking
about just the supermarket, but I’m talking about where it came from
before the supermarket. For a society that we live in that’s so obsessed
with fast food and dieting, health, prescriptions, The Biggest Loser, and
racing for the cure, it’s sort of dumbfounding that so many people don’t
even question where their food is coming from.
I myself started looking into this a while ago and ended up making the
decision to switch from the normal ground beef, which is grain-fed round
beef, to organic grass-fed ground beef, and in the two years since I made
the switch, I’ve become much healthier, much more energetic, and overall,
just feel better about myself.
In general I believe that grass-fed ground beef is the better choice
when it comes to that or grain-fed, which is what most people buy. So,
today we’ll look at the unhealthy by-products found in grain-fed ground
beef, as well as the unhealthy process by which that beef is made, and
then we’ll talk a little bit about grass-fed as a possible solution.
To begin, let’s talk about the unhealthy by-products you might find in
a normal tube of ground beef that you would buy from the supermarket.
According to Gerald Zirnstein, a former scientist with the U.S. Department
of Agriculture, 70 percent of our ground beef that we would buy contains
what he calls “pink slime.” And this is really just beef trimmings that have
been put together and sprayed down with ammonia gas to kill off bacteria.
And this pink slime was originally only allowed in dog food and then over
time it became allowed to be used in melted-down form in cooking oil.
And then finally it was allowed to be used in our ground beef as filler. And
so how did this happen? How did we come to adding this pink slime to
our ground beef? Well what ended up happening was that Joann Smith,
who used to work for the USDA as an undersecretary, ended up saying
that it was OK to add this, even though all the USDA scientists were
not even willing to go as far as naming this pink slime to be meat. They
wanted it to be listed as a separate ingredient, but she said, “No, it’s OK,”
Sample Persuasive Speech
Colter catches his audience’s
attention with a rhetorical
question. He wants his listeners
to be more mindful of what they
eat and where their food comes
from.
He helps to establish his
credibility by noting his personal
experience with the topic.
Here, Colter previews his major
idea and provides a general
overview of his main points.
By stating his purpose in his
introduction, he is assuming
that his audience will be
generally favorable toward his
goal or at least not hostile to his
key purpose.
In this portion of his speech,
Colter states the problem and
documents the significance of
the problem using statistics and
expert testimony.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 400 11/13/14 2:40 PM
401
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive Messages 17.5
and ignored what they said. And what ends up happening? Well, Joann
Smith retired from the USDA and goes and sits on the board of directors
for a company called Beef Products Inc., where she makes a cool
1.2 million dollars a year in that position. Now, what’s important to know
is that Beef Products Inc. is the largest producer of pink slime that is used
as this filler meat. So there’s a bit of a connection here. Hopefully, you
see that, too, that someone that allows pink slime to be added to all our
meat, then Beef Products Inc., is the largest supplier of it, their profits rise
greatly, and the person who made the decision on the government side of
things goes on to become a board member to make over a million dollars
a year from that company.
So now that we’ve talked about some by-products that you would
find in your ground beef, let’s talk about the unhealthy process used
to make ground beef. So, cows eat grass, and they’ve done this for
centuries, maybe millions of years. And, so why is it that we are feeding
them grain instead? It’s because, in order to produce enough meat as
quickly as possible, we wanted to fatten up these cows. And so the large
producers of ground beef decided that, hey, if we feed them grain, then
they’ll get fatter quicker, then we can slaughter them and get more meat
per cow. But according to the Union of Concerned Scientists, a grain diet
for cows leads to more health problems.
Follow me on this. With more health problems for the cows, they
treat the cows by giving them more antibiotics, and after giving them more
antibiotics, that means more antibiotics are making their way from the cow
onto our plate once we eat the meat. Now, say we start getting sick and
we usually take antibiotics to fight off an infection as well; if we’ve already
received those antibiotics from out meat that we’re eating, they are going
to be less effective once we need those antibiotics to fight off, you know,
the sickness that we have and that we’re fighting against.
So, the grain, on top of that, is a pretty subjective term as well. As I
was doing this research, I found out a few interesting things that count as
grain. The grain that is fed to our cows, which we turn around and eat,
includes feathers, hair, and bone marrow that has been melted down from
other animals, as well as swine waste, or as laymen say, pig poop, and
also the carcasses of dead, dying, diseased, and disabled animals such
as deer and elk.
It gets even better. On top of that, have you ever thought about what
happens if, at a farm, maybe a rodent or a roach or a bird, were to get into
some of the food and spoil the food? Maybe they ate some of it, maybe
they pooped in it. What happens to that food? Does it get thrown out?
No, it gets melted down and gets sprayed and heat-treated, so that it kills
off the bacteria. And then this is also given to the cows, which then ends
up on our plate as well. So, in the long run, we’re really just one extra
step away from eating rodent and roach feces. It’s pretty incredible when
you think about the fact that most people haven’t thought about what is
making it to our plates.
Now that I’ve worked up your appetite, I want to talk a little bit about
grass-fed beef, as well as a possible solution to, hopefully, what you’re not
going to eat anymore, which would be the grain-fed beef. So, according
to the Journal of Nutrition, grass-fed beef contains no pink slime, and it
also contains less fat and less cholesterol than grain-fed beef. And this is
actually not just a recent study; this was a study that was done over the
Colter provides a fluent
transition to his next point by
briefly recapping his ideas and
then telling his listeners what he
will talk about next.
In this section Colter uses facts,
statistics, and expert testimony
to draw his key conclusions. He
also uses alliteration to express
his information in a memorable
way.
Colter uses effective description
and explanation to further
amplify the significance of the
problem he is trying to avoid.
Colter contrasts the negative
aspects of the problem by
noting more positive results
by comparison. He wants you
to see the advantages of his
proposed solution: Eat beef
from grass-fed cattle.
(continued)
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 401 11/13/14 2:40 PM
402 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.5
span of 30 years. They found consistently that grass-fed beef had better,
or excuse me, lower fat and lower cholesterol, and no random filler meat
as well. So on top of that, the same study also says that there is more
vitamin A and vitamin E, as well as antioxidants in grass-fed beef, as well.
And there’s also a better ratio of Omega-3 and Omega-6 fatty acids in
grass-fed beef, which is actually very important for brain health.
So a lot of people also like to dismiss grass-fed beef as, “Oh, it’s
only something that, you know, hippies would do,” or “I’m not all into the
organic thing.” Well, let me just offer this little fun fact. President Ronald
Reagan, the poster child for modern conservatism, demanded that he only
had organic beef while he was serving as president of the United States.
So, even Ronald Reagan was on board with organic grass-fed beef.
So, today we’ve talked about the unhealthy by-products that make
their way into grain-fed beef, which is pink slime, and the story behind
how it even got there in the first place. We have also talked about the
unhealthy process by which grain-fed cows are raised, including the
antibiotics they are given and what the actual grain consists of when it’s
not really grain. It’s really more of grain and animal carcass. And we’re also
offered a simple solution, which is to go to the grocery store and at least
try to buy organic grass-fed beef.
At least try it once. And so, that’s all I ask today, is not to make a life-
changing decision to never again eat the ground beef that comes in tubes,
but to go out and, at least one time, try grass-fed organic ground beef
As he moves into his
conclusion, he summarizes his
key arguments.
He ends with a specific call to
action, encouraging his listeners
to take a small step toward
addressing the problem he
described.
Many political candidates use a problem–solution approach. Problem: The
government wastes your tax dollars. Solution: Vote for me, and I’ll see to it that
government waste is eliminated. Problem: We need more and better jobs. ­
Solution:
Vote for me, and I’ll institute a program to put people back to work.
Note in the following outline of Jason’s speech, “The Dangers of Electro-
magnetic Fields,” how he plans to first document a clear problem and then
­
recommend strategies for managing the problem.
PROBLEM: Power lines and power stations around the country emit radia-
tion and are now being shown to increase the risk of cancer.
I.	 Childhood leukemia rates are higher in children who live near large
power lines.
II.	 The International Cancer Research Institute in Lyon, France, published
a report linking electromagnetic fields and childhood cancer.
SOLUTION: Steps can be taken to minimize our risk of health hazards
caused by electromagnetic energy.
I.	 The federal government should establish enforceable safety standards
for exposure to electromagnetic energy.
II.	 Contact your local power company to make sure its lines are operated
safely.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 402 11/13/14 2:40 PM
403
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive Messages 17.5
III.	 Stop using electric blankets.
IV.	 Use protective screens for computer-display terminals.
The problem–solution arrangement of ideas applies what you learned
about cognitive dissonance in Chapter 16. Identify and document a concern that
calls for change, and then suggest specific behaviors that can restore cognitive
balance.
Refutation
Another way to persuade an audience to support your point of view is to prove
that the arguments against your position are false—that is, to refute them. To use
refutation as a strategy for persuasion, you first identify objections to your posi-
tion that your listeners might raise and then refute or overcome those objections
with arguments and evidence. As we noted earlier in this chapter, research sug-
gests that in most cases it is better to present both sides of an issue rather than
presenting just the advantages of the position you advocate.
Suppose, for example, you plan to speak to a group of real-estate developers
to advocate a new zoning ordinance that would reduce the number of build-
ing permits granted in your community. Your listeners will undoubtedly have
­
concerns about how the ordinance will affect their ability to build homes and
make money. You could organize your presentation to this group using those
two obvious concerns as major issues to refute. Your major points could be as
follows.
I.	 The new zoning ordinance will not cause an overall decrease in the
number of new homes built in the community.
II.	 The new zoning ordinance will have a positive effect on the profits of
local real-estate developers.
You would be most likely to use refutation as your organizational strategy
when your position is being attacked. Or if you know what your listeners’ chief
objections are to your persuasive proposal, you could organize your speech
around the arguments that your listeners hold. In her speech to promote organ
donation, Tasha used the refutation strategy by identifying several myths that, if
believed, would keep people from becoming organ donors.* She identified each
myth and then explained why the myth is, in fact, a myth.
I.	 Myth number 1: If doctors know I’m an organ donor, they won’t work as
hard to save me.
Refutation: Doctors pledge, as part of their Hippocratic oath, that sav-
ing your life is paramount. Furthermore, a patient must be declared
brain dead before their organs may be taken.
* Tasha Carlson, “License to Save.” From Winning Orations 2009, Mankato, MN: Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2009. Reprinted with permission.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 403 11/13/14 2:40 PM
404 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.5
II.	 Myth number 2: If I donate my organs, my family will be charged for the
surgical costs.
Refutation: If you donate your organs, there will be no charge to your family.
III.	 Myth number 3: I can’t have an open casket funeral if I’m an organ donor.
Refutation: The donor’s body is clothed for burial, so there are no
­
visible signs of donation.
IV.	 Myth number 4: I can’t donate my organs because I am too old.
Refutation: There is no specific age cut-off for organ donation. The final
decision is based on overall organ health, not age.
Tasha could have used the refutation strategy to organize her entire speech,
or the refutation technique could be used as a portion of a larger organizational
strategy such as problem–solution.
If your persuasive presentation using a refutation strategy will be followed
by a question-and-answer forum, you should be prepared to answer questions.
Credible evidence, facts, and data will be more effective than will emotional
arguments alone when you are attempting to persuade an audience that you
know is not in favor of your persuasive objective. In your postspeech session,
you can use your refutation skills to maintain a favorable audience response to
your message in the face of criticism or attacks on the soundness of your logic.
Cause and Effect
Like the problem–solution pattern to which it is closely related, the cause-and-
effect approach was introduced in Chapter 9 as a useful organizational strategy.
You can use two basic approaches to this strategy:
•	 From effect to cause. One way to use the cause-and-effect method is to begin
with an effect, or problem, and then identify the causes of the problem in an
effort to convince your listeners that the problem is significant. A speech on
the growing problem of gangs might focus on poverty, drugs, and a finan-
cially crippled school system.
•	 From cause to effect. You could also organize a message by noting the problem
and then spelling out the effects of the problem. If you identify the problem
as too many unsupervised teenagers roaming your community’s streets af-
ter 11 p.m., you could organize a speech around the effects this problem is
having on your fellow citizens.
The goal of using cause-and-effect organization for a persuasive speech
is to convince your listeners that one event caused another. For example, you
may try to reason that students in your state have low standardized test scores
­
because they had poor teachers. Of course, you must prove that no other factors
are ­
responsible for the low test scores. It may not be the teachers who caused the
low test scores; perhaps it was the lack of parental involvement or one or more
of a number of other factors.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 404 11/13/14 2:40 PM
405
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive Messages 17.5
Here’s how a persuasive speech could be organized using a cause-and-effect
strategy:
I.	 There is high uncertainty about whether interest rates will increase or
decrease. (cause)
II.	 Money markets are unstable in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin
America. (cause)
III.	 There has been a rise in unemployment. (cause)
IV.	 In the late 1920s in the United States, these three conditions were
­
followed by a stock-market crash. They will likely cause another crash
today. To avoid losing money, you should decrease the amount of
money you have invested in stocks. (effect)
The challenge in using a cause-and-effect organizational strategy is to prove that
one event caused another. Earlier, we noted the causal fallacy ­
(“after this, therefore
because of this,” or post hoc, ergo propter hoc). Simply because two events occurred
at the same time or in close succession does not prove that there is a cause-and-
effect relationship. Suppose a study found that many people who spend several
hours a day on the Internet are also psychologically depressed. This finding does
not ­necessarily prove that Internet use causes ­
depression—other factors could have
caused the depression. Perhaps people who are ­
depressed are more likely to use
the Internet because they find comfort and ­
security in using technology.
The Motivated Sequence
The motivated sequence is a five-step organizational plan that has proved
­
successful for several decades. Developed by Alan Monroe, this simple yet ­
effective
strategy for organizing speeches incorporates principles that have been confirmed
by research and practical experience.38 Based on the ­
problem–­
solution pattern, it
also uses the cognitive dissonance approach that we discussed in Chapter 16: First,
disturb your listeners; then point them toward the specific change you want them
to adopt. The five steps are attention, need, satisfaction, visualization, and action.
 1.	 Attention. Your first goal is to get your listeners’ attention. In Chapter 10, we
­discussedspecificattention-catchingmethodsofbeginningaspeech.­Remember
the particular benefits of using a personal or hypothetical example, a startling
statement, an unusual statistic, a rhetorical question, or a well-worded analogy.
The attention step is, in essence, the introduction to your speech.
Heather caught listeners’ attention at the start of her award-winning
speech “End the Use of Child Soldiers”* with this riveting introduction:
When 12-year-old Ishmael Beah left his village in Sierra Leone to
­
perform in a talent show in a town just a few miles away, he had no
* Heather Zupanic, “End the Use of Child Soldiers,” Speech excerpts in “The Motivated
Sequence” section are from Winning Orations 2009, Mankato, MN; Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2009. Reprinted with permission.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 405 11/13/14 2:40 PM
406 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.5
idea that in a matter of only a few days he would lose everything—his
­
family, his friends, and even his childhood. He returned to find that a
rebel army had killed his entire family and decimated his town.
 2.	Need. Having gotten the attention of your audience, you need to establish
why your topic, problem, or issue should concern your listeners. Arouse dis-
sonance. Tell your audience why the current program, politician, or what-
ever you’re attempting to change is not working. Convince them that there
is a need for a change. You must also convince your listeners that this need
for change affects them directly. During the need step, you should develop
logical arguments backed by ample evidence to support your position.
To document the significance of the problem of children being used as
soldiers and the need to do something to address the problem, Heather pro-
vided specific evidence:
. . . at any one time, 300,000 children under the age of 18 are forced to
fight in military conflicts. As Peter Warren Singer, director of the
21st Century Defense Initiative at the Brookings Institute, states,
child ­
warfare is not only a human rights travesty but also a great
threat to global and national security.
She personalized the problem for her audience this way: “Clearly, this
crisis is having an enormous impact on the children themselves, on their na-
tion states, and finally on our own country.”
 3.	Satisfaction. After you present the problem or need for concern, you next
identify how your plan will satisfy the need. What is your solution to the
problem? At this point in the speech, you need not go into great detail. Pre-
sent enough information that your listeners have a general understanding of
how the problem may be solved.
Heather suggested that the solution to the problem of children serving
as soldiers included using the United Nations to take legal action to enforce
existing treaties and to bring this issue to the attention of government lead-
ers throughout the world. At this point in her speech, she kept her solution
(to involve government leaders) general. She waited until the end of her
speech to provide specific action that the audience members could take to
implement her solution. Heather also reinforced the urgency of the need for
the audience to act by stating, “Clearly, the time has come to take a stand
against the atrocities that child soldiers face.”
 4.	 Visualization. Now you need to give your audience a sense of what it would
be like if the solution you just proposed were or were not adopted. You could
take a positive-visualization approach: Paint a picture with words to communi-
cate how wonderful the future will be if your solution is adopted. You could
take a negative-visualization approach: Tell your listeners how awful things will
be if your solution is not adopted. If they think things are bad now, just wait;
things will get worse.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 406 11/13/14 2:40 PM
407
Strategies for Organizing Persuasive Messages 17.5
Heather wanted her listeners to visualize the significant negative ­
results
that were likely to occur if the problem of child soldiers went unsolved.
She began with a general statement of what would happen to children if no
­
action were taken.
The first consequence of child warfare is that these children are left
with serious emotional and psychological scarring due to the violence
and abuse they must endure.
She further painted her negative picture by using a specific emotional exam-
ple in which she described the additional consequences.
Ten-year-old Jacques from the Congo described how the Mayi-Mayi
militia would often starve him and beat him severely. He says, “I
would see others die in front of me.”
Heather also pointed out that if the problem is not addressed soon, it will
grow, and more children will be negatively affected.
Heather only used a negative visualization approach. She could, however,
have made her visualization step even stronger by combining negative and
positive visualization. A combined positive and negative visualization tells
how a problem will be solved if your solution is adopted and describes how
the world will be a much worse place if your solution is not adopted. Heather
might, for example, have added a description that helped her listeners visu-
alize the virtues of taking action, by describing poignant scenes of children
being reunited with their families.
Martin Luther King Jr. drew on visualization as a rhetorical strategy in
his moving “I Have a Dream” speech, presented in Appendix B. He power-
fully and poetically painted a picture with words that continues to provide
hope and inspiration today.
 5.	Action. This last step forms the basis of your conclusion. You tell your audi-
ence the specific action they can take to implement your solution. Identify
exactly what you want your listeners to do. Give them simple, clear, easy-
to-follow steps to achieve your goal. For example, you could give them a
phone number to call for more information, provide an address so that they
can write a letter of support, hand them a petition to sign at the end of your
speech, or tell them for whom to vote.
Heather offered specific actions that her listeners could take to address
the problem of children serving as soldiers: “The first step we can take is to
petition the members of the United Nations to enforce the treaties they have
signed, and we can do this by joining the Red Hand Campaign.” She made
her action step simple and easy when she further explained to her audience:
You can join this campaign by simply signing your name to a pre-written
letter and tracing your hand on a red piece of construction paper after
this [speech]. I will then cut and paste your handprint to your letter and
forward them on to the UN.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 407 11/19/14 10:54 AM
408 Using Persuasive Strategies
17.5
The best action step spells out precisely the action your audience should
take. Here, Heather tells her listeners what to do and what will happen next.
You can modify the motivated sequence to suit the needs of your topic and
your audience.
•	 For a receptive audience, you do not have to spend a great deal of time on the
need step. They already agree that the need is serious. However, they might
want to learn about some specific actions that they can take to implement
a solution to the problem. Therefore, you would be wise to emphasize the
satisfaction and action steps.
•	 For a hostile audience, you should spend considerable time on the need step.
Convince your listeners that the problem is significant and that they should
be concerned about the problem. You would probably not propose a lengthy,
detailed action.
•	 For a neutral or indifferent audience, spend time getting your listeners’ atten-
tion and inviting their interest in the problem. The attention and need steps
should be emphasized.
The motivated sequence is a guide, not an absolute formula. Use it and the
other suggestions about speech organization, reviewed in Table 17.2, to help you
achieve your specific objective. Be audience-centered; adapt your message to
your listeners.
Table 17.2  Organizational Patterns for Persuasive Messages
Pattern Definition Example
Problem–solution Present the problem; then present the solution. I.	 The national debt is too high.
II.	 We need to raise taxes to lower the debt.
Refutation Anticipate your listeners’ key objections to your
proposal and then address them.
I.	 Even though you may think we pay too much tax,
we are really undertaxed.
II.	 Even though you may think the national debt will
not go down, tax revenue will lower the deficit.
Cause and effect First present the cause of the problem; then note
how the problem affects the listeners. Or identify
a known effect; then document what causes the
effect.
I.	 The high national debt is caused by too little tax
revenue and too much government spending.
II.	 The high national debt will increase both inflation
and unemployment.
Motivated
sequence
A five-step pattern of organizing a speech;
its steps are attention, need, satisfaction,
visualization, and action.
I.	 Attention: Imagine a pile of $1,000 bills 67 miles
high. That’s our national debt.
II.	 Need: The increasing national debt will cause
­
hardships for our children and grandchildren.
III.	 Satisfaction: We need higher taxes to reduce our
debt.
IV.	 Visualization: Imagine our country in the year 2050;
it could have low inflation and full employment or be
stuck with a debt ten times our debt today.
V.	 Action: If you want to lower the debt by increasing
tax revenue, sign my petition that I will send to our
representatives.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 408 11/13/14 2:40 PM
409
Chapter 17  study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
17.1	 Identify and use strategies to improve your initial, derived, and
terminal credibility.
Credibility is a listener’s view of a speaker. The three factors that contribute to
credibility are competence, trustworthiness, and dynamism. Initial credibility is
your listeners’ idea of your credibility before you start speaking. Derived cred-
ibility is the perception that they form while you speak. Terminal credibility is
the perception that the audience has after you’ve finished speaking. Specific
strategies can enhance all three types of credibility.
Key Terms
Competence
Trustworthiness
Dynamism
Charisma
Initial credibility
Derived credibility
Terminal credibility
17.2	 Use principles of effective logic and evidence to develop a persuasive
message.
The effectiveness of logical arguments hinges on the proof that you employ.
Proof consists of evidence plus the reasoning that you use to draw conclusions
from the evidence. Three types of reasoning are inductive reasoning, which
moves from specific instances or examples to reach a general, probable con-
clusion; deductive reasoning, which moves from a general statement to reach
a ­
specific, more certain conclusion; and causal reasoning, which relates two or
more events so as to be able to conclude that one or more of the events caused
the others. Two popular types of inductive reasoning include reasoning by anal-
ogy and reasoning by sign. You can use four types of evidence: facts, examples,
opinions, and statistics. Avoid using fallacious arguments.
Key Terms
Inductive reasoning
Generalization
Reasoning by sign
Deductive reasoning
Syllogism
Major premise
Minor premise
Conclusion
Causal reasoning
Fact
Inferences
Examples
Reluctant testimony
Fallacy
Causal fallacy
Bandwagon fallacy
Either/or fallacy
Hasty generalization
Ad hominem
Red herring
Appeal to misplaced
 authority
Non sequitur
17.3	 Employ effective techniques of using emotional appeal in a persuasive
speech.
Emotional response theory has identified three dimensions of emotional
­
response to a message: pleasure–displeasure, arousal–nonarousal, and
­
dominance–powerlessness. Specific suggestions for appealing to audience
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 409 11/13/14 2:40 PM
410 Chapter 17  study guide
emotions include using examples; emotion-arousing words; nonverbal behav-
ior; selected appeals to fear; and appeals to such emotions as hope, pride, cour-
age, and the revered.
Key Terms
Emotional response theory
Myth
Demagogue
17.4	 Adapt your persuasive message to receptive, neutral, and unreceptive
audiences.
Consider the following strategies to adapt ideas to people and people to ideas:
•	 To persuade the receptive audience: Identify with the audience. State your
speaking objectives. Tell the audience members what you want them to do.
Ask for an immediate show of support. Use emotional appeals effectively.
Make it easy for your listeners to act.
•	 To persuade the neutral audience: Capture your listeners’ attention early in
your speech by referring to beliefs that many listeners share. Relate your
topic not only to your listeners but also to their families, friends, and loved
ones. Be realistic in what you expect to accomplish.
•	 For an unreceptive audience: Don’t immediately announce that you plan to
change your listeners’ minds. Begin your speech by noting areas of agree-
ment before you discuss areas of disagreement. Establish your credibility
early in your message. Acknowledge the opposing points of view that
members of your audience may hold. Consider making understanding
rather than advocacy your goal. Advance your strongest argument first.
Don’t expect a major shift in attitude from a hostile audience.
17.5	 Identify and use strategies for effectively organizing a persuasive
speech.
Four patterns for organizing a persuasive speech are problem–solution, refuta-
tion, cause and effect, and the motivated sequence. The five steps of the moti-
vated sequence are attention, need, satisfaction, visualization, and action. Adapt
the motivated sequence to your specific audience and persuasive objective.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 410 11/13/14 2:40 PM
411
Chapter 17  study guide
Think about These Questions
•	 Imagine that you delivering your final speech of the term in your public-
speaking class. What specific strategies can you implement to enhance your
initial, derived, and final credibility as a public speaker in the minds of
your classmates?
•	 Karl believes strongly that the tragedy of the Holocaust could occur again.
He plans to show exceptionally graphic photos of Holocaust victims dur-
ing his speech to his public-speaking class. Is it ethical to show graphic,
emotion-arousing photos to a captive audience?
•	 Janice’s persuasive speech has the purpose “After my speech, listeners
should support the establishment of a wellness program for our company.”
Using this purpose, draft main ideas for a speech organized according to
each of the following patterns: problem–solution, refutation, cause and
­
effect, and the motivated sequence.
M17_BEEB3981_05_SE_C17_371-412.indd 411 11/13/14 2:40 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
413
Chapter 18
Speaking for Special
Occasions and
Purposes
“It’s like singing
‘The Star-Spangled
Banner’ at the
World Series.
Nobody came
to hear you, but
it’s not an official
event unless you
do it.”
—Barney Frank
18.1	 Public Speaking in the Workplace
Group Presentations
Public-Relations Speeches
18.2	 Ceremonial Speaking
Speeches of Introduction
Toasts
Award Presentations
Nominations
Acceptances
Keynote Addresses
Outline
(continued)
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 413 11/13/14 5:26 PM
414 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18
Learning Objectives
	18.1	Identify and explain the requirements for two types of speaking
situations likely to arise in the workplace.
	18.2	List and describe nine types of ceremonial speeches.
	18.3	List and explain strategies for creating humor in speech.
There is money in public speaking. Many of the politicians, athletes, and celebri-
ties who speak professionally earn six- or even seven-figure fees for a single talk.
•	 Former president George W. Bush has charged about $150,000 per speech
since leaving the presidency.1
•	 Former vice president and Nobel Peace Prize winner Al Gore has made as
much as $156,000 for a speech on global climate change.2
•	 Former British prime minister Tony Blair has made as much as $616,000—
more than $10,000 a minute—for two 30-minute speeches.3
•	 Business, real estate, and entertainment mogul Donald Trump was paid
$1.5 million per lecture for 17 seminar appearances.4
•	 And former president Bill Clinton made nearly $40 million in speaking fees
in the first years after he left the White House.5
But the record speaking fee might still be the $2 million for two 20-minute
speeches given by former president Ronald Reagan to a Japanese company in 1989.6
Although most of us will never be rewarded so lavishly for our public-
speaking efforts, it is likely that we will at some time be asked to make a
business or professional presentation or to speak on some occasion that calls for
celebration, commemoration, inspiration, or entertainment. Special occasions
are important enough and frequent enough to merit study, regardless of the like-
lihood of their resulting in wealth or fame for the speaker.
In this chapter, we discuss the various types of speeches that may be called
for on special occasions, and we examine the specific and unique audience
expectations for each one. First, we will discuss two speaking situations that are
likely to occur in the workplace. Then we will turn our attention to several types
of ceremonial speeches and the humorous after-dinner speech.
Commencement Addresses
Commemorative Addresses
Eulogies
	18.3	After-Dinner Speaking: Using Humor
Effectively
Humorous Topics
Humorous Stories
Humorous Verbal Strategies
Humorous Nonverbal Strategies
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 414 11/17/14 1:00 PM
415
Public Speaking in the Workplace 18.1
Public Speaking in the Workplace
18.1	 Identify and explain the requirements for two types of speaking
situations likely to arise in the workplace.
In many careers and professions, public speaking is a daily part of the job. Work-
place audiences may range from a group of three managers to a huge audito-
rium filled with company employees. Presentations may take the form of routine
meeting management, reports to company executives, training seminars within
the company, or public-relations speeches to people outside the company. The
occasions and opportunities are many, and chances are good that you will be asked
or expected to do some on-the-job public speaking in the course of your career.
Group Presentations
After a group has reached a decision, solved a problem, or uncovered new
­information, group members often present their findings to others. The audience-
centered principles of preparing an effective speech apply to group members who
are designing a group oral presentation just as they do to individual speakers.
As our familiar model in Figure 18.1 suggests, the central and most impor-
tant step is to analyze the audience who will listen to the presentation. Who are
18.1
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Figure 18.1 Use the audience-centered model of public
speaking to help your group plan a group presentation.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 415 11/13/14 5:26 PM
416 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.1
these listeners? What are their interests and backgrounds? And what do they
need to know? One business consultant suggests,
Tune your audience into radio station WIIFM—What’s In It For Me. Tell
your listeners where the benefits are for them, and they’ll listen to every-
thing you have to say.7
As you do when developing an individual speech, make sure you have a clear
purpose and a central idea divided into logical main ideas. This is a group effort, so
you need to make sure each group member can articulate the purpose, the central
idea, main ideas, key supporting material, and the overall outline for the presentation.
Selecting a Presentation Format  Unless a format for your group pre-
sentation has been specified, your group will need to determine how to deliver
the presentation. Three primary formats for sharing reports and recommenda-
tions with an audience are the symposium presentation, the forum presentation,
and the panel discussion.
•	 A symposium is a public discussion during which the members of a group
share responsibility for presenting information to an audience. Usually
a moderator and the group members are seated in front of the audience,
and each group member is prepared to deliver a brief report. Each speaker
should know what the other speakers will present so that the same ground
is not covered twice. At the end of the speeches, the moderator may sum-
marize the key points. The audience can then participate in a question-and-
answer session or a forum presentation.
•	 In a forum presentation, audience members direct questions and comments
to a group, and group members respond with short impromptu speeches.
In ancient Rome, the forum was a marketplace where citizens went to shop
and discuss the hot issues of the day. It later became a public meeting place
where political speeches were often delivered.
A forum often follows a more structured presentation, such as a sympo-
sium or a prepared speech by one group member. Forum presentations work
best when all group members know the issues and are prepared to respond
unhesitatingly to questioners.
•	 A panel discussion is an informative group presentation. Individuals on the
panel may use notes on key facts or statistics, but they do not present formal
speeches. Usually, a panel discussion is organized and led by an appointed
chairperson or moderator.
An effective moderator gets all the panelists to participate, summarizes
their statements, and serves as a gatekeeper to make sure that no member of
the panel dominates the discussion. Panel discussions are often followed by
a question-and-answer period, or forum.
Planning a Group Presentation  Working in groups takes a coordi-
nated team effort. If you are used to developing reports and speeches on your
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 416 11/13/14 5:26 PM
417
Public Speaking in the Workplace 18.1
own, it may be a challenge to work with others on a group assignment. Consider
these suggestions for enhancing teamwork:
•	 Make sure group members understand the task or assignment, and work together
to identify a topic. Take a few moments to verbalize the goals and objectives
of the assignment. Don’t immediately plunge in and try to start dividing up
the work just so that you can hurry off to your next class or responsibility.
•	 If your group assignment is to solve a problem or to inform the audience about a
specific issue, try brainstorming to develop a topic or question (see Chapter 7).
Then assess your audience’s interests as well as group members’ interests
and talents to help you choose among your ideas.
•	 Give group members individual assignments. After you decide on your group’s
presentation topic, divide up the tasks involved in investigating the issues.
Also devise a plan for keeping in touch with one another frequently to share
information and ideas.
•	 Develop a group outline. After group members have researched key issues,
begin drafting an outline of your group presentation. Your presentation
should have an introduction and a conclusion that reflect your group’s work
as an integrated problem-solving team. Decide who will present which por-
tions of your outline.
•	 Decide on your presentation format. Determine whether you will use a sympo-
sium, a forum, a panel presentation, or some combination of these formats.
•	 Rehearse the presentation. Just as you would for an individual speech, rehearse
the presentation. If you are using visual aids, be sure to incorporate them in
your rehearsal. Also, be sure to time your presentation when you rehearse.
•	 Incorporate principles and skills of effective audience-centered public speaking when
giving the group presentation. Adapt to your listeners. Your delivery and com-
ments should be well organized and fluent. Your visual aids should enhance
your presentation by being clear and attractive.
Making a Group Presentation  By now it should be clear that the skills
that are needed to give a group presentation mirror those that we’ve presented
throughout the book. But because a group presentation creates the additional chal-
lenge of coordinating your communication efforts with other group or team mem-
bers, keep the following tips in mind as you offer conclusions or recommendations:
•	 Clarify your purpose. Just as with an individual speech, it is important for lis-
teners to know what your group’s speaking about and to understand why
you are presenting the information to them; it is also important for each group
member to be reminded of the overarching goal of the presentation. It would
be helpful if the first speaker could ensure that the audience has a good
understanding of the group’s purpose. If your group is responding to a specific
discussion question, it can be useful to write the question or purpose of the
presentation on a chalkboard, whiteboard, flipchart, or PowerPointTM slide.
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 417 11/13/14 5:26 PM
418 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.1
•	 Use presentation aids effectively. You can use presentation aids not only to
clarify your purpose, but also to summarize key findings and recommenda-
tions. Visual aids can serve the important function of unifying your group
presentation. If your group is using PowerPoint visuals, consider having
each group member use the same template and font style to add to the coor-
dinated look and feel of your presentation.
•	 Choose someone to serve as coordinator or moderator. Groups need a balance
between structure and interaction. Without adequate structure, conversa-
tion can bounce from person to person and the presentation will lack a clear
focus. A moderator can help provide needed structure to a group presenta-
tion by introducing both the topic and the group members. A moderator can
also help to keep track of time and ensure that no one either dominates the
discussion or speaks too little.
•	 Be ready to answer questions. Communication, as we’ve emphasized, is
more than just giving people information; it also includes responding to
­
feedback and questions from listeners. Group presentations often include
a ­
question-and-answer session (forum) following the presentation. Besides
being informed about your topic, you should have thoroughly read any
written report the group has distributed.
In Chapter 13, we presented strategies for responding to questions, includ-
ing tips for responding to hostile questions. If someone asks a question that has
just been asked and answered, or asks an irrelevant or poorly worded question,
don’t criticize the questioner. Be polite, tactful, and gracious. Rather than self-
righteously saying, “That’s a dumb question” or “Someone just asked that,”
calmly provide an answer and move on. If you don’t understand a question, just
Quick Check
Tips for Successful Group Presentations
Work as a group to
•	 Understand the task.
•	 Brainstorm problem solutions.
•	 Choose a presentation format.
•	 Outline and rehearse the presentation.
•	 Make the presentation and answer questions.
Work as an individual to
•	 Complete the assignment.
•	 Contribute to meetings and rehearsals.
•	 Participate in the presentation.
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 418 11/13/14 5:26 PM
419
Public Speaking in the Workplace 18.1
ask for more clarification. Also, don’t let a questioner start making a speech. If it
looks as though a questioner is using the question-and-answer period to give an
oration, gently ask, “And what is your question?” or “How can we help you?”
This approach should elicit a question that you can then address and return the
communication process back to the control of the group.
Public-Relations Speeches
People who work for professional associations, blood banks, utility companies,
government agencies, universities, churches, or charitable institutions, as well
as those employed by commercial enterprises, are often called on to speak to an
audience about what their organization does or about a special project that the
organization has taken on. These speeches are public-relations speeches. They
are designed to inform the public and improve relations with them—either in
general or because a particular program or situation has raised questions.
Discuss The Need or Problem  A public-relations speaker begins by dis-
cussing the need or problem that has prompted the speech. Then he or she goes
on to explain how the company or organization is working to meet the need or
solve the problem—or why it believes that there is no problem.
Anticipate Criticism  It is important in public-relations speaking to antici-
pate criticism. The speaker may acknowledge and counter potential problems
or objections, especially when past presenters have encountered opposition to
a policy or program. It should be noted that not all public-relations speeches
make policy recommendations. Many simply summarize information for those
who need to know. A speaker who is discussing a policy or program, however,
should respond to criticism by emphasizing the positive aspects of the organi-
zation’s activities and should take care not to become defensive. He or she wants
to leave the impression that the company or organization has carefully worked
through potential pitfalls and drawbacks.
For example, local developer Jack Brooks is very aware that many of those
present at the city council meeting are opposed to his developing an area of land
within the popular Smythson Creek greenbelt. Rather than ignoring the objec-
tions, he deliberately and carefully addresses them:
Many of you here tonight played in the Smythson Creek greenbelt as
children. It was there that you learned to swim and that you hiked with
your friends. I, too, share memories of those experiences.
I want to assure you that my proposed development will actually
help to preserve the greenbelt. We will dedicate in perpetuity an acre of
unspoiled greenbelt for each acre we develop. Further, we will actively
seek to preserve that unspoiled land by hiring an environmental special-
ist to oversee its protection.
As things stand now, we risk losing the entire greenbelt to pollution
and unmanaged use. I can promise a desirable residential development,
plus the preservation of at least half the natural environment.
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 419 11/13/14 5:26 PM
420 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.2
Ceremonial Speaking
18.2	 List and describe nine types of ceremonial speeches.
Kairos is the Greek term that rhetoricians use to describe the circumstances sur-
rounding, or the occasion for, a speech. If the occasion is one that brings people
together to celebrate, thank or praise someone else, or to mourn, a speech given
on that occasion is known as a ceremonial speech or epideictic speech. We will
explore nine types of ceremonial speeches: introductions, toasts, award presenta-
tions, nominations, acceptances, keynote addresses, commencement addresses,
commemorative addresses and tributes, and eulogies.
Speeches of Introduction
Most of us have heard poor introductions. A nervous speaker making a speech
of introduction stands up and mispronounces the main speaker’s name. Or the
introducer speaks for five or ten minutes before yielding to the main speaker.
An introductory speech is much like an informative speech. The speaker
delivers the introduction to provide information to the audience about the main
speaker.
The ultimate purpose of an introduction, however, is to arouse interest in
the main speaker and his or her topic. In fact, when you are asked to introduce
a featured speaker or an honored guest, your purposes are similar to those of a
good speech introduction: You need to get the attention of the audience, build
the speaker’s credibility, and introduce the speaker’s general subject. You also
need to make the speaker feel welcome while revealing some of his or her per-
sonal qualities to the audience so that they can feel they know the speaker more
intimately. There are two cardinal rules of introductory speeches:
Be Brief  The audience has come to hear the main speaker or to honor the
guest, not to listen to you.
Be Accurate  Nothing so disturbs a speaker as having to begin by correcting
the introducer. If you are going to introduce someone at a meeting or dinner,
ask that person to supply you with biographical data beforehand. If someone
else provides you with the speaker’s background, make sure the information
is accurate. Be certain that you know how to pronounce the speaker’s name and
any other names or terms you will need to use.
This following short speech of introduction adheres to the two criteria: It’s
brief and it’s accurate.
This evening, friends, we have the opportunity to hear one of the most
innovative mayors in the history of our community. Mary Norris’s expe-
rience in running her own real-estate business gave her an opportunity
to pilot a new approach to attracting new businesses to our community,
even before she was elected mayor in last year’s landslide victory. She
was recently recognized as the most successful mayor in our state by
18.2
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 420 11/13/14 5:26 PM
421
Ceremonial Speaking 18.2
the Good Government League. Not only is she a skilled manager and
spokesperson for our city, but she is also a warm and caring person. I am
pleased to introduce my friend, Mary Norris.
Finally, keep the needs of your audience in mind at all times. If the person you
are introducing truly needs no introduction to the group, do not give one! Just
welcome the speaker and step aside. (Note that the president of the United
States is always introduced simply: “Ladies and gentlemen, the president of the
United States.”)
Toasts
Most people are asked at one time or another to provide a toast on some
momentous occasion—a wedding, a celebration of the birth of a baby, a reunion
of friends, a successful business venture. A toast is a brief salute to such an
occasion, usually accompanied by a round of drinks and immediately followed
by the raising or clinking together of glasses or goblets. The custom is said to
have taken its name from the old custom of tossing a bit of bread or a crouton
into a beverage for flavoring.8 “Drinking the toast” was somewhat like enjoying
a dunked doughnut.
The modern toast is usually quite short—only a few sentences at most. Some
toasts are very personal, as, for example, one given by a wedding guest who is a
close friend of both the bride and the groom:
I would like to say a few words about this couple. You see, I knew Rachel
and Ben before they were a couple—when they were friends. I first met
Rachel when we were freshmen in high school. Her sarcastic sense of
humor has kept me laughing ever since.9
In contrast, a toast made by someone who does not know the primary
celebrants so well may be more generic. Here is an example of such a generic
wedding toast:
When the roaring flames of your love have burned down to embers, may
you find that you’ve married your best friend.10
If you are asked to make an impromptu toast, let your audience and the occa-
sion dictate what you say. Sincerity is more important than wit. At a dinner your
authors attended in Moscow a few years ago, all the guests were asked to stand
at some point during the meal and offer a toast. Although this Russian custom
took us by surprise, one of our friends gave a heartfelt and well-received toast
that went something like this:
We have spent the past week enjoying both the natural beauty and the
man-made marvels of your country. We have visited the exquisite pal-
aces of the czars and stood in amazement before some of the world’s
great art treasures. But we have also discovered that the most important
national resource of Russia is the warmth of her people. Here’s to new
and lasting friendships.
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 421 11/13/14 5:26 PM
422 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.2
Our Russian hosts were most appreciative. The rest of us were impressed.
Mary’s toast was a resounding success because she spoke sincerely about her
audience and the occasion.
Award Presentations
Presenting an award is somewhat like introducing a speaker or a guest:
Remember that the audience did not come to hear you, but to see and hear the
winner of the award. Nevertheless, making an award presentation, a speech
that accompanies the conferring of an award, is an important responsibility. An
award presentation has three distinct components, described in the ­
preceding
How To box.
Nominations
A nomination speech is similar to an award presentation. It too involves not-
ing the occasion and describing the purpose and significance of, in this case,
the office to be filled. The person who is making the nomination should explain
clearly why the nominee’s skills, talents, and past achievements serve as quali-
fications for the position. And the actual nomination should come at the end of
the speech.
When Senate Minority Leader Everett Dirksen nominated Barry Goldwater
for the Republican presidential candidacy in 1964, he emphasized those personal
Present an Award
	1.	
Refer to the occasion of the presentation.  Awards are often given to mark the anni-
versary of a special event, the completion of a long-range task, the accomplishments of a
lifetime, or high achievement in some field.
	2.	
Talk about the history and significance of the award.  This second section of the
speech may be fairly long if the audience knows little about the award; it will be brief if the
audience is already familiar with the history and purpose of the award. Whatever the award,
a discussion of its significance will add to its meaning for the person who receives it.
	3.	
Name the award recipient.  The final section of the award presentation will be naming the
person to whom it has been given.
•	 Tell why the person won.  The longest part of this segment is a glowing description of
the achievements that elicited the award.
•	 Decide when to reveal the name.  If the name of the person getting the award has
already been made public, you may refer to him or her by name throughout your
description. If you are going to announce the individual’s name for the first time, you
will probably want to recite the achievements first and save the drama of the actual
announcement until the last moment.
How
To
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 422 11/13/14 5:26 PM
423
Ceremonial Speaking 18.2
qualities of the admittedly controversial candidate that he thought would
appeal to the audience:
Whether in commerce or finance, in business or industry, in private or
public service, there is such a thing as Competence. . . . Barry Goldwater
has demonstrated it over and over in his every activity. As Chief of
Staff of his state National Guard, he brought about its desegregation
shortly after World War II and long before civil rights became a burn-
ing issue. He brought integration to his own retail enterprises. For his
own employees he established the five-day week and a health and life
insurance plan. All this was done without fanfare or the marching of
bands.11
And Dirksen ended his speech with the nomination itself:
I nominate my friend and colleague, Barry Goldwater of Arizona, to be
the Republican candidate for President of the United States.
Acceptances
Anyone who receives an award or nomination usually responds with a brief
­
acceptance speech. Acceptance speeches have received something of a bad name
because of the lengthy, emotional, rambling, and generally boring speeches
­
delivered annually on prime-time TV by the winners of the film industry’s
­
Oscars. As the late humorist Erma Bombeck once wryly noted,
People exchange wedding vows in under thirty seconds. . . . You only get
thirty seconds to come up with the final “Jeopardy” answer. My kids can
demolish a pizza in thirty seconds.
So how long does it take to say, “Thank you?”12
The same audience that may resent a long oration will readily appreci-
ate a brief, heartfelt expression of thanks. In fact, brief acceptance speeches
can actually be quite insightful, even inspiring, and can leave the audience
feeling no doubt that the right person won the award. Two months before he
died in 1979, John Wayne accepted an honorary Oscar with these touching
words:
Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Your applause is just about the
only medicine a fella would ever need. I’m mighty pleased I can am-
ble here tonight. Oscar and I have something in common. Oscar first
came on the Hollywood scene in 1928. So did I. We’re both a little
weatherbeaten, but we’re still here and plan to be around a whole lot
longer.13
If you ever have to give an acceptance speech, it may be an impromptu
speech, because you may not know that you have won until the award is pre-
sented. The formula in the How To should help you compose a good acceptance
speech on the spur of the moment.
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 423 11/13/14 5:26 PM
424 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.2
Keynote Addresses
A keynote address is usually presented at or near the beginning of a meeting or
conference. The keynote emphasizes the importance of the topic or the purpose
of the meeting, motivates the audience to learn more or work harder, and sets
the theme and tone for other speakers and events.
The hardest task the keynote speaker faces is arousing audience interest.
Legendary musician Bruce Springsteen wryly acknowledged this challenge when
he delivered his keynote speech at the 2012 SXSW music festival in Austin, Texas:
How important can this speech be if we’re giving it at noon? It can’t be
that important. Every decent musician in town is asleep. . . .14
One way in which a keynote speaker can interest or inspire is to incorpo-
rate examples and illustrations to which the audience can relate. The late Texas
congresswoman Barbara Jordan delivered keynote addresses at two Democratic
National Conventions, one in 1976 and the other in 1992. Note how she used
specific examples in this excerpt from the 1992 keynote:
The American dream . . . is slipping away from too many. It is slipping
away from too many black and brown mothers and their children; from
the homeless of every color and sex; from the immigrants living in com-
munities without water and sewer systems. The American dream is slip-
ping away from the workers whose jobs are no longer there because we
are better at building war equipment that sits in warehouses than we are
at building decent housing.15
Commencement Addresses
Cartoonist Garry Trudeau has said that the commencement address was invented
largely in the belief that outgoing college students should never be
released into the world until they have been properly sedated.16
Accept an Award
	1.	
Thank the presenter.  First, you should thank the person making the presentation and the
organization that he or she represents.
	2.	
Thank your supporters.  It is also gracious to thank a few people who have contributed
greatly to your success—but resist thanking a long list of everyone you have ever known,
down to the family dog.
	3.	
Comment on what the award means to you.  You may also wish to reflect on the larger
significance of the award to the people and ideals it honors.
	4.	
Consider your audience.  Finally, try to find some meaning the award may have for your
audience—people who respect your accomplishments and who may themselves aspire to
similar achievements.
How
To
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 424 11/13/14 5:26 PM
425
Ceremonial Speaking 18.2
Unfortunately, most commencement speeches of the past probably deserved
Trudeau’s assessment. Commencement speakers often seemed oblivious to their
audience on an occasion that demands and deserves audience-centeredness. In
contrast, however, more recent commencement speeches have been described as
much more personal, infused with self-deprecating humor, raunchy
asides and references to the speaker’s own humble or distant origins.17
An audience-centered commencement address must fulfill two important func-
tions described next.
Praise The Graduates  First, the commencement speaker should praise
the graduating class. Because the audience includes the families and friends of
the graduates, the commencement speaker can gain their goodwill (as well as that
of the graduates themselves) by pointing out the significance of the graduates’
accomplishments. New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg congratulated the 2013
graduating class of Stanford University with this tribute:
There’s no question that the Class of 2013 is . . . “The greatest class in the
history of Stanford!”18
Focus on The Future  Second, the audience-centered commencement
speaker should turn graduates toward the future. A commencement address is
not the proper forum in which to bemoan the world’s inevitable destruction or
the certain gloomy economic future of today’s graduates. Rather, commence-
ment speakers should suggest bright new goals and try to inspire the graduates
to reach for them, as oceanographer Sylvia Earle did with these words:
You can hold the world in your hands on your desktop, your laptop.
You can Google-earth. You can dive into the ocean in ways that no one
who preceded this time could do it. You, literally, hold the world in your
hands.19
Commencement speakers who want to be audience-centered can pick up
additional tips from former Hewlett Packard CEO Carly S. Fiorina, who
consulted by email with the graduating class of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology before her commencement address to them. She discovered that
students wanted a speech based on life experience, not theory, and advice on
how to make the decisions needed to live life. And, Fiorina adds, “On one point
there was complete unanimity: Please don’t run over your time.”20
Commemorative Addresses
A commemorative address, a speech delivered during ceremonies held to cel-
ebrate some past event, is likely to include a tribute to the person or persons
involved. For example, a speech given on the Fourth of July both commemorates
the signing of the Declaration of Independence and pays tribute to the people
who signed it. Your town’s sesquicentennial celebrates both the founding and
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 425 11/13/14 5:26 PM
426 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.2
the founders of the town. And if you were asked to speak at the reception for
your grandparents’ fiftieth wedding anniversary, you would probably relate the
stories they’ve told you of their wedding day and then go on to praise their
accomplishments during their fifty years together.
A commemorative speaker is, in part, an informative speaker. He or she
needs to present some facts about the event and/or the people being celebrated.
Then the speaker builds on those facts, urging the audience to let past accom-
plishments inspire them to achieve new goals.
Speaking at Pointe du Hoc, France, in June 1994 during ceremonies to com-
memorate the fifty-year anniversary of D-Day, President Bill Clinton paid trib-
ute to the assembled veterans:
We are the children of your sacrifice. We are the sons and daughters you
saved from tyranny’s reach. We grew up behind the shield of the strong
alliances you forged in blood upon these beaches, on the shores of the
Pacific and in the skies above us. We flourished in the nation you came
home to build. The most difficult days of your lives bought us fifty years
of freedom.21
His tribute completed, Clinton added this challenge:
Let us carry on the work you began here. You completed your mission
here, but the mission of freedom goes on; the battle continues.
Eulogies
A eulogy—a speech of tribute delivered when someone has died—can be one of
the most significant and memorable and also one of the most challenging forms
of commemorative address. As the editor of a recent collection of eulogies notes,
A good eulogy can be . . . a bridge between the living and the dead,
between us and them, memory and eternity. The more specific and real
the remembrances spoken, the stronger the bridge.22
When you deliver a eulogy, you should mention—indeed, linger on—the
unique achievements of the person to whom you are paying tribute and, of
course, express a sense of loss. The mother of a child killed in the 2012 ­
Newtown,
Connecticut, school shooting opened up her eulogy for her little boy on this
heart-wrenching note of grief:
The sky is crying, and the flags are at half-mast. It is a sad, sad day.23
But it is also proper in a eulogy to include personal and even humorous recollec-
tions of the person who has died. In his eulogy for his beloved Aunt Betty, John
T. Masterson, Jr. related this humorous story:
Whereas other relatives sent books, clothing, or sensible toys for Christ-
mas and birthdays, Aunt Betty tended toward the offbeat . . . There was
the year she (or the mail order house) got the order number wrong and
sent me reflective driveway markers for Christmas. The thing about
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 426 11/13/14 5:26 PM
427
After-Dinner Speaking: Using Humor Effectively 18.3
Aunt Betty was that if you received a gift like that, you didn’t recognize
it as a mistake; instead, my family and I sat around the Christmas tree
trying to figure out the joke!24
Finally, turn to the living, and encourage them to transcend their sorrow and
sense of loss and feel instead gratitude that the dead person had once been alive
among them.
Quick Check
Types of Ceremonial Speeches
•	 Speeches of introduction
•	 Toasts
•	 Award presentations
•	 Nominations
•	 Acceptances
•	 Keynote addresses
•	 Commencement addresses
•	 Commemorative addresses and tributes
•	 Eulogies
After-Dinner Speaking: Using Humor
Effectively
18.3	 List and explain strategies for creating humor in speech.
If you are a human being or even a reasonably alert shrub, chances are that
sooner or later a club or organization will ask you to give a speech. The
United States is infested with clubs and organizations, constantly engag-
ing in a variety of worthwhile group activities such as (1) eating lunch;
(2) eating dinner, (3) eating breakfast, and of course, (4) holding banquets.
The result is that there is a constant demand for post-meal speakers,
because otherwise all you’d hear would be the sounds of digestion.25
With typically irreverent wit, columnist Dave Barry thus begins his observations
on the activity known as after-dinner speaking. He is certainly right about one
thing: the popularity of mealtime meetings and banquets among business and
professional organizations and service clubs. And with such meetings inevitably
comes the requirement for an after-dinner speech.
Interestingly, not only is the after-dinner speech not always after dinner (as
Barry points out, the meal is just as likely to be breakfast or lunch), but it is also
not always after anything. The after-dinner speech may be delivered before the
meal or even between courses.
18.3
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 427 11/13/14 5:26 PM
428 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.3
Former First Lady Barbara Bush preferred to schedule speeches first and
dinner later during state dinners. In another variation, Librarian of Congress
James Billington, at a dinner in honor of philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville,
served up one speech between each course, “so that one had to earn the next
course by listening to the speech preceding it.”26
After-dinner speeches may present information or persuade, but their pri-
mary purpose is to entertain—arguably the most inherently audience-centered
of the three general purposes for speaking discussed in Chapter 7.
Humorous Topics
Because humor is listener-centered, the central question for the after-dinner
speaker seeking a topic must be this: What do audiences find funny?
The Comedy Gym in Austin, Texas, a school for aspiring stand-up comedi-
ans, advocates that speakers start with “themselves, their lives, what make them
laugh.”27 Audiences almost always enjoy hearing a speaker poke fun at himself
or herself. Comedy writer Jon Macks points out that self-deprecating humor is
“an instant way to establish a rapport with an audience.”28
Even serious subjects can lend themselves to humorous presentations. One
speechwriter notes that humor can help a speaker achieve rapport with the
audience and can help the audience to remember the speaker’s message:
If you can find a way to make a point with humor, you’ve improved the
odds of making your message stick. For example, say you’re expecting
a tax increase, and you want to let your audience know. You might say,
“Well, Congress has finally decided how to divide up the pie; trouble is,
we’re the pie.”29
Increased taxes, not an inherently humorous topic, can still be treated
humorously. So can other serious topics. Earlier in this chapter, we discussed
the use of humor in eulogies. Gun control, the U.S. health care industry, and
capitalism—subjects tackled by Michael Moore in the films Bowling for Columbine,
Sicko, and Capitalism: A Love Story—are serious topics made more palatable to
listeners by the use of humor. For example:
A scrolling text of the pre-existing medical conditions that insurance
companies use to reject prospective applicants is set to the Star Wars
theme against an outer-space backdrop.30
Although Moore’s medium is film rather than speech, the same principle ap-
plies: Many serious subjects can be treated with humor.
Are any subjects inappropriate for an after-dinner speech? A few years ago,
Catholic groups were outraged by comedian Robin Williams’ comic treatment
of pedophilia among Catholic priests during a late-night television interview.
Williams was known for pushing the boundaries of propriety and taste, but
audience-centered public speakers should exercise greater restraint. Because it is
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 428 11/13/14 5:26 PM
429
After-Dinner Speaking: Using Humor Effectively 18.3
the audience that “gives attempts at humor their success or failure,”31 topics that
might create a great deal of emotional noise (such as grief or anger) for particular
audiences would not be good topics for humorous speeches to those groups. A
humorous treatment of childhood cancer would most likely only distress an
audience of parents who had lost children to that disease.
Humorous Stories
Humorous stories should be simple. Complicated stories and jokes are rarely
perceived by audiences as funny. Jay Leno claims that
Jokes work best when they’re easy to understand.”32
Co-writers Michael Blastland and David Spiegelhalter agree, adding,
If nothing happens in a story, it is not usually a story, it’s a joke.”33
Successful after-dinner speakers also need a broad repertoire of jokes,
humorous anecdotes, and one-liners; one says that she gathers approximately
25 to 30 in preparation for writing a speech.34 She explains,
This will be reduced to the best and most appropriate 6 or 7, but one
needs as much material as possible to begin with.
Finally, it is important to know your anecdotes very well. Nothing deflates a
humorous story more than getting halfway through and then saying, “Oh, and
I forgot to tell you. . . .” Rehearse your jokes. Only if you know the material can
you hope to deliver it with the intonation and timing that will make it funny.
Humorous Verbal Strategies
A funny story or a “one-liner” may rely on one of the following verbal strategies
for humorous effect.
Pun  Most of us are familiar with the pun, which relies on double meanings
to create humor. For example, consider the old joke in which an exasperated
speaker tries to explain the meaning of “hide” by shouting “Hide! Hide! A cow’s
outside!” provokes the response “I’m not afraid of cows.” The joke relies on two
meanings of hide: to conceal oneself and the skin (outside) of an animal.
Spoonerism  Another play on words is the spoonerism, named for William
Spooner, a professor at Oxford University in the 1930s, who frequently used it
(inadvertently, in his case). A spoonerism occurs when someone switches the
initial sounds of words in a single phrase: “sublic peaking” instead of “public
speaking,” for example. In one joke that relies on a spoonerism, the Chattanooga
Choo-choo becomes the “cat who chewed the new shoes.” Many parodies and
satires employ spoonerisms to avoid charges of libel or copyright infringement;
a spoonerism might be employed to name a boy wizard “Perry Hotter.”
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 429 11/13/14 5:26 PM
430 Speaking for Special Occasions and Purposes
18.3
Malapropism  Named for the unfortunate Mrs. Malaprop in Richard Brinsley
Sheridan’s eighteenth-century play The School for Scandal, a malapropism is the
mistaken use of a word that sounds much like the intended word: “destruction”
for “instruction,” for example.
Hyperbole  Exaggeration, or hyperbole, is often funny. In an after-dinner
speech on “The Alphabet and Simplified Spelling,” Mark Twain claimed,
Simplified spelling brought about sun-spots, the San Francisco earth-
quake, and the recent business depression, which we would never have
had if spelling had been left all alone.35
Of course, spelling could not have caused such catastrophes, but by using
­
hyperbole, Twain makes his point in a humorous way.
Understatement  The opposite of hyperbole, understatement involves
downplaying a fact or event. Microsoft founder and Harvard dropout Bill Gates
downplayed his meteoric success by telling the Harvard class of 2007,
I did the best of everyone who failed.36
Verbal Irony  A speaker who employs verbal irony says just the opposite
of what he or she really means. Student Chris O’Keefe opens his speech on read-
ing Shakespeare with the following statement:
At a certain point in my life, I came to the realization that I wanted to
spend my life’s effort to become a great playwright.37
Chris reveals the verbal irony of the statement when he continues,
It has been about an hour and a half now and the feeling is still going
strong.
Wit  One of the most frequently used verbal strategies for achieving humor is
the use of wit: relating an incident that takes an unexpected turn at the end.
Research suggests that witty humor may enhance a speaker’s credibility.38
Accepting the 2007 Oscar for Best Actress, Helen Mirren paid tribute to the
monarch she had portrayed on screen in The Queen:
For 50 years and more, Elizabeth Windsor has maintained her dignity,
her sense of duty, and her hairstyle.39
The wit occurs in the final phrase “her hairstyle,” which catches the audience,
anticipating another majestic attribute, off guard.
Humorous Nonverbal Strategies
After-dinner speakers often create humor through such nonverbal cues as
posture, gesture, and voice. Well-timed pauses are especially crucial delivery
cues for after-dinner speakers to master. One experienced after-dinner speaker
advocates “a slight pause before the punch line, then pause while the audience
is laughing.”40
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 430 11/13/14 5:26 PM
431
After-Dinner Speaking: Using Humor Effectively 18.3
It is true that some people seem to be “naturally” funny. If you are not one
of them—if, for example, you struggle to get a laugh from even the funniest
joke—you may still be able to use the strategies outlined above and summarized
in Table 18.1 to prepare and deliver an after-dinner speech that is lighthearted
and clever, if not uproariously funny. Such a speech can still be a success.
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Table 18.1  Strategies for Achieving Humor in After-Dinner Speeches
Humorous Topics Inherently funny subjects or humorous treatments of serious
subjects
Humorous Stories Funny anecdotes
Humorous Verbal Strategies  
   Play on words An intentional error such as a pun, spoonerism, or
malapropism
  Hyperbole Exaggeration
  Understatement Downplaying a fact or event
  Verbal irony Saying just the opposite of what one means
  Wit An unexpected turn at the end of a fact or incident
Humorous Nonverbal Strategies Physical or vocal elements such as posture, gesture, pauses,
and intonation
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 431 11/13/14 5:26 PM
432 Chapter 18 study guide
Study Guide: Review and Apply
Meet Your Objectives
18.1	 Identify and explain the requirements for two types of speaking
situations likely to arise in the workplace.
Public-speaking skills are used frequently in the workplace when making group
presentations or public-relations speeches. Group presentation formats include
symposium, forum, and panel discussion events. Group members should work
individually and with the group to plan and make group presentations. Public-
relations speakers should inform listeners about the need or problem that occa-
sioned the speech and prepare for criticism.
Key Terms
Symposium
Forum
Panel discussion
Public-relations speeches
18.2	 List and describe nine types of ceremonial speeches.
Special-occasion speeches require you to apply your speaking skills to unique
situations. This chapter offers advice for making these ceremonial speeches,
including introductions, toasts, award presentation, nominations, acceptances,
keynote addresses, commencement addresses, commemorative addresses and
tributes, and eulogies.
Key Terms
Kairos
Ceremonial (epideictic)
  speech
Speech of introduction
Toast
Award presentation
Nomination speech
Acceptance speech
Keynote address
Commencement address
Commemorative
  address
Eulogy
18.3	 List and explain strategies for creating humor in speech.
After-dinner speaking is an established institution in which speakers entertain
through the use of humorous topics and stories, humorous verbal strategies, and
humorous nonverbal strategies.
Key Terms
After-dinner speech
Pun
Spoonerism
Malapropism
Hyperbole
Understatement
Verbal irony
Wit
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 432 11/13/14 5:26 PM
433
Chapter 18 study guide
Think about These Questions
•	 A friend asks your advice about how to prepare for her first speech to
her colleagues in a new job. Explain how she can apply to her workplace
speaking task some of the principles and skills you have learned from
this text.
•	 You have been asked to introduce at your school a Pulitzer Prize–winning
poet who will be reading from her work. What will you do to ensure that
you follow the two cardinal rules of introductory speeches?
•	 You were a member of the jury during a highly publicized and controver-
sial murder trial. After the verdict has been delivered, several local organi-
zations offer to pay you well to speak to their members. Is it ethical to cash
in on your experience this way? Why or why not?
M18_BEEB3981_05_SE_C18_413-434.indd 433 11/13/14 5:26 PM
A01_BEEB3046_05_SE_EXAM_FM_i-xx.indd 6 11/19/14 8:31 PM
this page intentionally left blank
Part 7
Appendixes
Appendix A	 Speaking in Small Groups
Appendix B	 Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
Deliver
Speech
Generate
Main Ideas
Develop
Central
Idea
Gather
Supporting
Material
Select and
Narrow
Topic
Rehearse
Speech
Determine
Purpose
Organize
Speech
CONSIDER
THE
AUDIENCE
Appendixes
A,
B
7
Z01A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB7.indd 1 11/18/14 9:30 PM
Discuss with classmates or write your answers to these questions
as you study this section.
Appendix A  Speaking in Small Groups
1.	 How can you improve your participation in groups?
2.	 Which role or roles do you most often fill in groups? Which role or roles would you like
to start filling more or less often?
3.	 Describe in your own words at least three characteristic behaviors of effective leaders.
Appendixes
A,
B
7
Z01A_BEEB3981_05_SE_TAB7.indd 2 11/18/14 9:30 PM
435
Appendix A
Speaking in Small
Groups
Groups are an integral part of our lives. Work groups, family groups, therapy
groups, committees, and class-project groups are just a few of the groups in
which we may participate at one time or another. Chances are that you have had
considerable experience in communicating in small groups.
Why learn about group communication in a public-speaking class? More
than two thousand years ago, Aristotle identified the link between public
­
speaking and group discussion when he wrote, “Rhetoric is the counterpart of
dialectic.” He meant that our efforts to persuade are closely linked to our group
efforts to search for truth.
In Aristotle’s time, people gathered to discuss and decide public issues in a
democratic manner. Today, we still turn to a committee, jury, or task force to get
facts and make recommendations. We still “search for truth” in groups. And as
in ancient Athens, once we believe we have found the truth, we present the mes-
sage to others in speeches and lectures.
In this appendix, you will learn key communication principles and skills
to help you work as a productive member of a small group. Specifically, you
will discover what small group communication is, learn ways to improve group
problem solving, enhance your leadership skills, and become an effective group
participant or group leader.1
Understanding Small Group
Communication
Small group communication is interaction among three to twelve people who
share a common purpose, feel a sense of belonging to the group, and influence
one another. Communication in groups larger than twelve people usually re-
sembles public speaking more than small group communication.
A team is a special kind of group. It is a coordinated small group of people
organized to work together with clearly defined roles and responsibilities, ex-
plicitly stated rules for operation, and well-defined goals.2 All teams are groups,
but not all groups are teams. A team, as our definition suggests, coordinates its
A.1
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 435 11/13/14 5:31 PM
436 Speaking in Small Groups
A.2
efforts through a clearly defined structure of who does what. Think of a sports
team in which members play by rules, have assigned roles, and have a clear
objective—to win the game. Work teams too have well-defined procedures for
accomplishing tasks. Teams are formed for a variety of reasons, such as to sell
products, elect a political candidate, or build an international space station.
Working in groups and teams has several advantages compared to working
on projects alone. Groups typically make better-quality decisions than do indi-
viduals for several reasons:3
•	 Groups usually have more information available.
•	 Groups are often more creative; the very presence of other people can spark
innovation.
•	 When you work in groups, you’re more likely to remember what you dis-
cussed, because you’re actively involved in processing information.
•	 Group participation usually results in group members being more satisfied
with their results than if someone simply told them what to do.
Although we have characterized working in groups as a positive experi-
ence, you know that working in groups can also be challenging, mainly for these
reasons:4
•	 Groups members may use excessive pressure to get others to conform to
their point of view.
•	 One person may dominate the discussion.
•	 Group members may rely too much on others and not do their part.
•	 Group work is more time-consuming (many people consider this the big-
gest disadvantage).
The goal of this appendix is to help decrease the disadvantages and increase
the advantages of working with others.
Solving Problems in Groups
and Teams
A central purpose of many groups and teams is solving problems. Problem solv-
ing is a process of finding ways of overcoming obstacles to achieve a desired
goal: How can we raise money for the new library? What should be done to
improve the local economy? How can we make higher education affordable for
everyone in our state? Each of these questions implies that there is an obstacle
(lack of money) blocking the achievement of a desired goal (new library, more
local income, affordable education).
Imagine that you have been asked to suggest ways to make a college edu-
cation more affordable. The problem: The high cost of higher education keeps
A.2
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 436 11/13/14 5:31 PM
437
Solving Problems in Groups and Teams A.2
many people from their goal of attending college. How would you begin to or-
ganize a group to solve this problem?
In 1910, John Dewey, a philosopher and educator, identified a method of prob-
lem solving that he called reflective thinking.5 Many groups have adapted his
multistep method as a way to organize the process of solving problems. Here are
the steps Dewey recommended: (1) Identify and define the problem, (2) analyze
the problem, (3) generate possible solutions, (4) select the best solution, and (5)
test and implement the solution. Although not every problem-solving discussion
has to follow these steps, reflective thinking does provide a helpful blueprint that
can relieve some of the uncertainty that exists when groups try to solve problems.
1. Identify and Define the Problem
Groups work best when they define their problem clearly and early in their
problem-solving process. To reach a clear definition, the group should consider
the following questions:
•	 What is the specific problem that concerns us?
•	 What terms, concepts, or ideas do we need to understand in order to solve
the problem?
•	 Who is harmed by the problem?
•	 When do the harmful effects occur?
Policy questions can help to define a problem and identify the course of ac-
tion that should be taken to solve it. As you recall from Chapter 16, policy ques-
tions often begin with a phrase such as “What should be done about . . .” or
“What could be done to improve. . . .” Here are some examples:
•	 What should be done to improve security at U.S. airports?
•	 What should be done to increase employment in our state?
•	 What steps can be taken to improve the U.S. trade balance with other countries?
If your group were investigating the high cost of pursuing a college educa-
tion, for example, after defining key terms such as “higher education” and “col-
lege” and gathering statistics about the magnitude of the problem, you could
phrase your policy question this way: “What could be done to reduce the high
cost of attending college?”
2. Analyze the Problem
Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald’s, said, “Nothing is particularly hard if you di-
vide it into small jobs.” Once the group understands the problem and has a well-
worded question, the next step is to analyze the problem. Analysis is a process
of examining the causes, effects, symptoms, history, and other background in-
formation that will help a group to eventually reach a solution. Analysis breaks
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 437 11/13/14 5:31 PM
438 Speaking in Small Groups
A.2
a large problem into smaller parts. When analyzing a problem, a group should
consider the following questions:
•	 What is the history of the problem?
•	 How extensive is the problem?
•	 What are the causes, effects, and symptoms of the problem?
•	 Can the problem be subdivided for further definition and analysis?
•	 What methods do we already have for solving the problem, and what are
their limitations?
•	 What obstacles might keep us from reaching a solution?
To analyze the problem of the high cost of attending college, your discus-
sion group will have to research the history of the problem and existing methods
of solving it. (See Chapter 8 for research advice.)
Included in the process of analyzing the problem is identifying criteria.
­
Criteria are standards for identifying an acceptable solution. They help you to
recognize a good solution when you discover one; criteria also help the group
to stay focused on its goal. Typical criteria for an acceptable solution specify
that the solution should be implemented on schedule, should be agreed to by all
group members, should be achieved within a given budget, and should remove
the obstacles causing the problem.
3. Generate Possible Solutions
When your group has identified, defined, and analyzed the problem, you will
be ready to generate possible solutions using group brainstorming. Guidelines
for effective group brainstorming are similar to those presented in Chapter 7 for
brainstorming speech topics.
•	 Set aside judgment and criticism. Criticism and faultfinding stifle creativity.
If group members find it difficult to withhold judgment, have individual
members write suggestions on paper first and then share the ideas with the
group or use an electronic brainstorming app that allows participants to
share ideas anonymously.
•	 Think of as many possible solutions to the problem as you can. All ideas are ac-
ceptable at this stage, even wild and crazy ones. Piggyback off one another’s
ideas. All members must come up with at least one idea.
•	 Have a member of the group record all the ideas that are mentioned. Use a flipchart
or chalkboard for in-person brainstorming, or an app or collaboration tool
for electronic brainstorming, so that all group members can see and respond
to all the ideas.
•	 After a set time has elapsed, evaluate the ideas, using criteria the group has es-
tablished. Approach the solutions positively. Do not be quick to dismiss an
idea, but do voice any concerns or questions you might have. The group can
brainstorm again later if it needs more creative ideas.
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 438 11/13/14 5:31 PM
439
Solving Problems in Groups and Teams A.2
As we’ve noted, some groups have found it useful to use technology to
help them generate options and possible solutions.6 In addition to apps and col-
laborative tools, a simple method is for group members to brainstorm solutions
to a problem individually and then email their list of ideas to each other. Or the
group’s leader could collect all of the ideas, eliminate duplicate suggestions, and
then share them with the group. Research suggests that groups can generate more
ideas if group members first generate ideas individually and then collaborate.7
4. Select the Best Solution
Next, the group needs to select the solution that best meets the criteria and
solves the problem. At this point, the group might need to modify its criteria or
even its definition of the problem.
Research suggests that after narrowing the list of possible solutions, the
most effective groups carefully consider the pros and the cons of each proposed
solution.8 Groups that don’t do this tend to make poor decisions because they
haven’t carefully evaluated the implications of their solution; they haven’t
looked before they leaped.
To help in evaluating the solution, consider the following questions:
•	 Which of the suggested solutions deals best with the obstacles?
•	 Does the suggestion solve the problem in both the short term and the long
term?
•	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of the suggested solution?
•	 Does the solution meet the established criteria?
•	 Should the group revise its criteria?
•	 What is required to implement the solution?
•	 When can the group implement the solution?
•	 What result will indicate success?
If the group is to reach agreement on a solution, some group members will
need to abandon their attachment to their individual ideas for the overall good
of the group. Experts who have studied how to achieve consensus—support
for the final decision by all members—suggest that summarizing frequently
and keeping the group oriented toward its goal are helpful. Emphasizing where
group members agree, clarifying misunderstandings, writing down known facts
for all members to see, and keeping the discussion focused on issues rather than
on emotions are other strategies that facilitate group consensus.9
5. Test and Implement the Solution
The group’s work is not finished when it has identified a solution. The impor-
tant questions “How can we put the solution into practice?” and “How can we
evaluate the quality of the solution?” have yet to be addressed. The group might
want to develop a step-by-step plan that describes the process for implementing
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 439 11/13/14 5:31 PM
440 Speaking in Small Groups
A.3
the solution, a time frame for implementation, and a list of individuals who will
be responsible for carrying out specific tasks.
Quick Check
Steps in Problem Solving
1.	 Identify and clearly define the problem.
2.	 Analyze the problem and identify criteria.
3.	 Generate possible solutions.
4.	 Select the best solution.
5.	 Test and implement the solution.
Participating in Small Groups
To be an effective group participant, you have to understand how to manage the
problem-solving process. But knowing the steps is not enough; you also need
to prepare for meetings, evaluate evidence, effectively summarize the group’s
progress, listen courteously, and be sensitive to conflict.
Come Prepared for Group Discussions
To contribute to group meetings, you need to be informed about the issues. Pre-
pare for group discussions by researching the issues. If the issue before your
group is the use of asbestos in school buildings, for example, research the most
recent scientific findings about the risks of this hazardous material. Chapter
8 describes how to use the library and the Internet to gather information for
speeches. Use those research techniques to prepare for group deliberations as
well. Bring your research notes to the group; don’t just rely on your memory or
your personal opinion to carry you through the discussion. Without research,
you will not be able to analyze the problem adequately.
Do Not Suggest Solutions before Analyzing
the Problem
Research suggests that you should analyze a problem thoroughly before trying
to zero in on a solution.10 Resist the temptation to settle quickly on one solution.
First, your group should systematically examine the causes, effects, history, and
symptoms of a problem.
Evaluate Evidence
One study found that a key difference between groups that make successful de-
cisions and those that don’t lies in the ability of the group members to examine
A.3
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 440 11/13/14 5:31 PM
441
Leading Small Groups A.4
and evaluate evidence.11 Ineffective groups are more likely to reach decisions
quickly without considering the validity of evidence (or sometimes without any
evidence at all). Such groups usually reach flawed conclusions.
Help to Summarize the Group’s Progress
Because it is easy for groups to get off the subject, group members need to sum-
marize frequently what has been achieved and point the group toward the goal
or task at hand. One research study suggests that periodic overviews of the
discussion’s progress can help the group stay on target.12 Ask questions about
the discussion process rather than about the topic under consideration: “Where
are we now?” “Could someone summarize what we have accomplished?” and
“Aren’t we getting off the subject?”
Listen and Respond Courteously to Others
Chapter 5’s suggestions for improving listening skills are useful when you work
in groups, but understanding what others say is not enough. You also need to
respect their points of view. Even if you disagree with someone’s ideas, keep
your emotions in check and respond courteously. Being closed-minded and de-
fensive usually breeds group conflict.
Help Manage Conflict
In the course of exchanging ideas and opinions about controversial issues, dis-
agreements are bound to occur.13 You can help prevent conflicts from derailing
the problem-solving process by doing the following:
•	 Keep the discussion focused on issues, not on personalities.
•	 Rely on facts rather than on personal opinions for evidence.
•	 Seek ways to compromise; don’t assume that there must be a winner and a loser.
•	 Try to clarify misunderstandings in meaning.
•	 Be descriptive rather than evaluative and judgmental.
•	 Keep emotions in check.
If you can apply these basic principles, you can help make your group an
effective problem-solving team.
Leading Small Groups
Rudyard Kipling wrote, “For the strength of the pack is the wolf, and the
strength of the wolf is the pack.” Group members typically need a leader to help
the group collaborate effectively and efficiently, and a leader needs followers in
order to lead. In essence, leadership is the process of influencing other people
A.4
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 441 11/13/14 5:31 PM
442 Speaking in Small Groups
A.4
through communication. Some see a leader as one individual who has been em-
powered to delegate work and direct the group. In reality, however, group lead-
ership is often shared.
Leadership Responsibilities
Leaders are needed to help get tasks accomplished and to maintain a healthy
social climate for the group. Table A.1 lists specific roles for task leaders and
maintenance leaders. Rarely does one person perform all these leadership respon-
sibilities, even if a leader is formally appointed or elected. Most often, a number
of individual group members will assume some specific leadership task, based
on their personalities, skills, sensitivity, and the group’s needs.
If you determine that the group needs a clearer focus on the task or that
maintenance roles are needed, be ready to influence the group appropriately
to help get the job done in a positive, productive way. Leaders of large or for-
mal groups may use parliamentary procedure to bring structure to meetings,
for example. If you find yourself in such a leadership situation, Web sites
such as Robert’s Rules of Order can help you to implement parliamentary
procedure.
Table A.1  Leadership Roles in Groups and Teams
Source: Based on Kenneth D. Benne and Paul Sheats, “Functional Roles of Group Members,”Journal of Social Issues 4 (Spring 1948): 41–49.
  Leadership Role Description
Task Leaders Agenda setter Helps to establish the group’s agenda
Help to get tasks
accomplished
Secretary Takes notes during meetings and distributes handouts before and during
the meeting
  Initiator Proposes new ideas or approaches to group problem solving
  Information seeker Asks for facts or other information that helps the group to deal with the
issues and may also ask for clarification of ideas or obscure facts
  Opinion seeker Asks for clarification of the values and opinions expressed by group
members
  Information giver Provides facts, examples, statistics, and other evidence that helps the
group achieve its task
  Opinion giver Offers opinions about the ideas under discussion
  Elaborator Provides examples to show how ideas or suggestions would work
  Evaluator Makes an effort to judge the evidence and the conclusion the group reaches
  Energizer Tries to spur the group to further action and productivity
Group Maintenance Leaders Encourager Offers praise, understanding, and acceptance of others’ ideas
Help to maintain a healthy
social climate
Harmonizer Mediates disagreements that occur between group members
  Compromiser Attempts to resolve conflicts by trying to find an acceptable middle ground
between disagreeing group members
  Gatekeeper Encourages the participation of less talkative group members and tries to
limit lengthy contributions of other group members
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 442 11/13/14 5:31 PM
443
Leading Small Groups A.4
Leadership Styles
Leaders can be described by the types of behavior, or leadership styles, that they
exhibit as they influence the group to help achieve its goal. When you are called
on to lead, do you give orders and expect others to follow you? Or do you ask
the group to vote on the course of action to follow? Or maybe you don’t try to
influence the group at all. Perhaps you prefer to hang back and let the group
work out its own problems. These strategies describe the three general leader-
ship styles: authoritarian, democratic, and laissez-faire.14
•	 Authoritarian leaders. Authoritarian leaders assume positions of superiority,
giving orders and taking control of the group’s activity. Although authori-
tarian leaders can usually organize group activities with a high degree of
efficiency and virtually eliminate uncertainty about who should do what,
most problem-solving groups prefer democratic leaders.
•	 Democratic leaders. Having more faith in their groups than do authoritarian
leaders, democratic leaders involve group members in the decision-making
process rather than dictating what should be done. Democratic leaders fo-
cus more on guiding discussion than on issuing commands.
•	 Laissez-faire leaders. Laissez-faire leaders allow group members complete
freedom in all aspects of the decision-making process. They do little to help
the group achieve its goal. This style of leadership (or nonleadership) often
leaves a group frustrated because it lacks guidance and has to struggle with
organizing the work.
Table A.2 compares the three styles.
Table A.2  Leadership Style
Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
  Authoritarian Leaders Democratic Leaders Laissez-Faire Leaders
Group Policy
Formation
All policies are determined by the
leader.
All policies are a matter of group
discussion and decision; leader
assigns and encourages group
discussion and decision making.
Complete non-participation by
leader in policy decisions.
Group Activity
Development
Group techniques and activities
are dictated by the leader, one
at a time; future steps are largely
unknown to group members.
Discussion yields broad
perspectives and general steps
to the group goal; when technical
advice is needed, leader suggests
alternative procedures.
Leader supplies needed materials,
making it clear that he or she can
supply information when asked,
but takes no other part in the
discussion.
Source of Work
Assignments
Leader dictates specific work
tasks and teams; leader tends to
remain aloof from active group
participation except when directing
activities.
Members are free to work with
anyone; group decides on division
of tasks.
Complete freedom for individuals
or group to choose assignments,
minimal leader participation.
Praise/Criticism Leader tends to be personal in
praise or criticism of each member.
Leader is objective and fact-
oriented in praise and criticism,
trying to be a regular group
member in spirit without doing too
much of the work.
Leader offers infrequent
spontaneous comments on
member activities and makes no
attempt to appraise or control the
course of events.
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 443 11/13/14 5:31 PM
444 Speaking in Small Groups
A.4
What is the most effective leadership style? Research suggests that no single
style is effective in every group situation. Sometimes a group needs a strong
authoritarian leader to make decisions quickly so that the group can achieve its
goal. Although most groups prefer a democratic leadership style, leaders some-
times need to assert their authority to get the job done. The best leadership style
depends on the nature of the group task, the power of the leader, and the rela-
tionship between the leader and his or her followers.
One contemporary approach to leadership is transformational leadership.
Transformational leadership is not so much a particular style of leadership as it
is a quality or characteristic of relating to others.15 Transformational leadership
is the process of influencing others by building a shared vision of the future, in-
spiring others to achieve, developing high-quality individual relationships with
others, and helping people see how what they do is related to a larger frame-
work or system. To be a transformational leader is not just to perform specific
tasks or skills but also to have a philosophy of helping others see “the big pic-
ture” and inspiring them to make the vision of the future reality.16 Transforma-
tional leaders are good communicators who support and encourage rather than
act in a demeaning or demanding way.
Quick Check
Characteristics of Effective Leaders
•	 Contribute to tasks and maintenance.
•	 Adapt their leadership style to group needs.
•	 Work toward transformational leadership.
Z01_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPA_435-444.indd 444 11/13/14 5:31 PM
445
Appendix B
Speeches for
Analysis and
Discussion
I Have a Dream1
by Martin Luther King Jr., Washington, DC August 28, 1963
I am happy to join with you today in what will go down in history as the greatest
demonstration for freedom in the history of our nation.
Five score years ago, a great American, in whose symbolic shadow we stand
today, signed the Emancipation Proclamation. This momentous decree came as a
great beacon light of hope to millions of Negro slaves, who had been seared in the
flames of withering injustice. It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long night of their
captivity.
But one hundred years later, the Negro is still not free. One hundred years later,
the life of the Negro is still sadly crippled by the manacles of segregation and the
chains of discrimination. One hundred years later, the Negro lives on a lonely island of
poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of material prosperity. One hundred years later, the
Negro is still languished in the corners of American society and finds himself an exile in
his own land. And so we’ve come here today to dramatize a shameful condition.
In a sense we’ve come to our nation’s Capitol to cash a check. When the
architects of our republic wrote the magnificent words of the Constitution and the
Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every
American was to fall heir. This note was a promise that all men—yes, black men as
well as white men—would be guaranteed the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness.
It is obvious today that America has defaulted on this promissory note insofar as
her citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring this sacred obligation, America
has given the Negro people a bad check—a check which has come back marked
“insufficient funds.”
But we refuse to believe that the bank of justice is bankrupt. We refuse to believe
that there are insufficient funds in the great vaults of opportunity of this nation. And so
we’ve come to cash this check—a check that will give us upon demand the riches of
freedom and the security of justice.
We have also come to this hallowed spot to remind America of the fierce urgency of
now. This is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilizing drug
of gradualism. Now is the time to make the real promises of democracy. Now is the time
to rise from the dark and desolate valley of segregation to the sunlit path of racial justice.
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 445 11/13/14 5:31 PM
446 Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
B
Now is the time to lift our nation from the quicksands of racial injustice to the solid rock of
brotherhood. Now is the time to make justice a reality for all of God’s children.
It would be fatal for the nation to overlook the urgency of the moment. This
sweltering summer of the Negro’s legitimate discontent will not pass until there is an
invigorating autumn of freedom and equality. Nineteen sixty-three is not an end, but a
beginning. Those who hope that the Negro needed to blow off steam and will now be
content will have a rude awakening if the nation returns to business as usual. There will
be neither rest nor tranquility in America until the Negro is granted his citizenship rights.
The whirlwinds of revolt will continue to shake the foundations of our nation until the
bright day of justice emerges.
But there is something that I must say to my people, who stand on the warm
threshold which leads into the palace of justice. In the process of gaining our rightful
place, we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for
freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred.
We must forever conduct our struggle on the high plane of dignity and discipline.
We must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence. Again and
again we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul force.
The marvelous new militance which has engulfed the Negro community must not
lead us to a distrust of all white people. For many of our white brothers, as evidenced
by their presence here today, have come to realize that their destiny is tied up with
our destiny. They have come to realize that their freedom is inextricably bound to our
freedom. We cannot walk alone.
As we walk, we must make the pledge that we shall always march ahead. We
cannot turn back. There are those who are asking the devotees of civil rights, “When
will you be satisfied?” We can never be satisfied as long as the Negro is the victim
of the unspeakable horrors of police brutality. We can never be satisfied as long as
our bodies, heavy with the fatigue of travel, cannot gain lodging in the motels of the
highways and hotels of the cities. We cannot be satisfied as long as the Negro’s basic
mobility is from a smaller ghetto to a larger one. We can never be satisfied as long as
our children are stripped of their selfhood and robbed of their dignity by signs stating
“For Whites Only.” We cannot be satisfied as long as a Negro in Mississippi cannot
vote and a Negro in New York believes he has nothing for which to vote. No, no, we
are not satisfied, and we will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters, and
righteousness like a mighty stream.
I am not unmindful that some of you have come here out of great trials and
tribulations. Some of you have come fresh from narrow jail cells. Some of you have
come from areas where your quest for freedom left you battered by the storms
of persecution and staggered by the winds of police brutality. You have been the
veterans of creative suffering. Continue to work with the faith that unearned suffering is
redemptive.
Go back to Mississippi, go back to Alabama, go back to South Carolina, go back
to Georgia, go back to Louisiana, go back to the slums and ghettos of our Northern
cities, knowing that somehow this situation can and will be changed. Let us not wallow
in the valley of despair.
I say to you today, my friends, so even though we face the difficulties of today and
tomorrow, I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream.
I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of
its creed, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.”
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves
and the sons of former slaveowners will be able to sit down together at the table of
brotherhood.
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 446 11/13/14 5:31 PM
447
Speeches for Analysis and Discussion B
I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with
the heat of injustice, sweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an
oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they
will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. I have
a dream today.
I have a dream that one day, down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its
governor having his lips dripping with the words of interposition and nullification, one
day right there in Alabama little black boys and black girls will be able to join hands
with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers. I have a dream today.
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, every hill and mountain shall
be made low, the rough places will be made plain and the crooked places will be made
straight, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.
This is our hope. This is the faith that I go back to the South with. With this faith
we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope. With this
faith we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful
symphony of brotherhood. With this faith we will be able to work together, to pray
together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up for freedom together
knowing that we will be free one day.
This will be the day—this will be the day when all of God’s children will be able to
sing with new meaning, “My country ’tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.
Land where my fathers died, land of the Pilgrims’ pride, from every mountainside, let
freedom ring.” And if America is to be a great nation, this must become true.
So let freedom ring from the prodigious hilltops of New Hampshire. Let freedom
ring from the mighty mountains of New York. Let freedom ring from the heightening
Alleghenies of Pennsylvania!
Let freedom ring from the snowcapped Rockies of Colorado! Let freedom ring
from the curvaceous slopes of California!
But not only that. Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia!
Let freedom ring from Lookout Mountain of Tennessee!
Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi. From every
mountainside, let freedom ring.
And when this happens, when we allow freedom to ring—when we let it ring from
every village and every hamlet, from every state and every city—we will be able to speed
up that day when all of God’s children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles,
Protestants and Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing, in the words of the old
Negro spiritual, “Free at last! Free at last! Thank God almighty, we are free at last!”
Second Inaugural Address2
by Barack Obama, January 21, 2013
Vice President Biden, Mr. Chief Justice, Members of the United States Congress,
distinguished guests, and fellow citizens:
Each time we gather to inaugurate a President we bear witness to the enduring
strength of our Constitution. We affirm the promise of our democracy. We recall that
what binds this Nation together is not the colors of our skin or the tenets of our faith or
the origins of our names. What makes us exceptional—what makes us American—is our
allegiance to an idea articulated in a declaration made more than two centuries ago:
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are en-
dowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness.
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 447 11/13/14 5:31 PM
448 Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
B
Today we continue a never-ending journey to bridge the meaning of those words
with the realities of our time. For history tells us that while these truths may be self-
evident, they’ve never been self-executing; that while freedom is a gift from God, it
must be secured by His people here on Earth. The patriots of 1776 did not fight to
replace the tyranny of a king with the privileges of a few or the rule of a mob. They
gave to us a republic, a government of and by and for the people, entrusting each
generation to keep safe our founding creed.
And for more than 200 years, we have.
Through blood drawn by lash and blood drawn by sword, we learned that no
union founded on the principles of liberty and equality could survive half-slave and half-
free. We made ourselves anew, and vowed to move forward together.
Together, we determined that a modern economy requires railroads and highways
to speed travel and commerce, schools and colleges to train our workers.
Together, we discovered that a free market only thrives when there are rules to
ensure competition and fair play.
Together, we resolved that a great nation must care for the vulnerable and protect
its people from life’s worst hazards and misfortune.
Through it all, we have never relinquished our skepticism of central authority
nor have we succumbed to the fiction that all society’s ills can be cured through
government alone. Our celebration of initiative and enterprise, our insistence on hard
work and personal responsibility, these are constants in our character.
But we have always understood that when times change, so must we; that fidelity
to our founding principles requires new responses to new challenges; that preserving
our individual freedoms ultimately requires collective action. For the American people
can no more meet the demands of today’s world by acting alone than American
soldiers could have met the forces of fascism or communism with muskets and
militias. No single person can train all the math and science teachers we’ll need to
equip our children for the future, or build the roads and networks and research labs
that will bring new jobs and businesses to our shores. Now more than ever, we must
do these things together, as one nation and one people.
This generation of Americans has been tested by crises that steeled our resolve
and proved our resilience. A decade of war is now ending. An economic recovery
has begun. America’s possibilities are limitless, for we possess all the qualities that
this world without boundaries demands: youth and drive; diversity and openness; an
endless capacity for risk and a gift for reinvention. My fellow Americans, we are made
for this moment and we will seize it—so long as we seize it together.
For we, the people, understand that our country cannot succeed when a shrinking
few do very well and a growing many barely make it. We believe that America’s
prosperity must rest upon the broad shoulders of a rising middle class. We know that
America thrives when every person can find independence and pride in their work;
when the wages of honest labor liberate families from the brink of hardship. We are
true to our creed when a little girl born into the bleakest poverty knows that she has
the same chance to succeed as anybody else, because she is an American; she is free
and she is equal, not just in the eyes of God, but also in our own.
We understand that outworn programs are inadequate to the needs of our time.
So we must harness new ideas and technology to remake our government, revamp
our tax code, reform our schools, and empower our citizens with the skills they
need to work harder, learn more, reach higher. But while the means will change, our
purpose endures: a nation that rewards the effort and determination of every single
American. That is what this moment requires. That is what will give real meaning to
our creed.
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 448 11/13/14 5:31 PM
449
Speeches for Analysis and Discussion B
We, the people, still believe that every citizen deserves a basic measure of security
and dignity. We must make the hard choices to reduce the cost of health care and the
size of our deficit. But we reject the belief that America must choose between caring
for the generation that built this country and investing in the generation that will build
its future. For we remember the lessons of our past, when twilight years were spent in
poverty and parents of a child with a disability had nowhere to turn.
We do not believe that in this country freedom is reserved for the lucky, or
happiness for the few. We recognize that no matter how responsibly we live our
lives, any one of us at any time may face a job loss or a sudden illness or a home
swept away in a terrible storm. The commitments we make to each other through
Medicare and Medicaid and Social Security, these things do not sap our initiative, they
strengthen us. They do not make us a nation of takers; they free us to take the risks
that make this country great.
We, the people, still believe that our obligations as Americans are not just to
ourselves, but to all posterity. We will respond to the threat of climate change, knowing
that the failure to do so would betray our children and future generations. Some may
still deny the overwhelming judgment of science, but none can avoid the devastating
impact of raging fires and crippling drought and more powerful storms.
The path towards sustainable energy sources will be long and sometimes difficult.
But America cannot resist this transition, we must lead it. We cannot cede to other
nations the technology that will power new jobs and new industries, we must claim its
promise. That’s how we will maintain our economic vitality and our national treasure—
our forests and waterways, our croplands and snow-capped peaks. That is how
we will preserve our planet, commanded to our care by God. That’s what will lend
meaning to the creed our fathers once declared.
We, the people, still believe that enduring security and lasting peace do not require
perpetual war. Our brave men and women in uniform, tempered by the flames of battle,
are unmatched in skill and courage. Our citizens, seared by the memory of those we
have lost, know too well the price that is paid for liberty. The knowledge of their sacrifice
will keep us forever vigilant against those who would do us harm. But we are also heirs
to those who won the peace and not just the war; who turned sworn enemies into the
surest of friends—and we must carry those lessons into this time as well.
We will defend our people and uphold our values through strength of arms and
rule of law. We will show the courage to try and resolve our differences with other
nations peacefully—not because we are naive about the dangers we face, but because
engagement can more durably lift suspicion and fear.
America will remain the anchor of strong alliances in every corner of the globe.
And we will renew those institutions that extend our capacity to manage crisis abroad,
for no one has a greater stake in a peaceful world than its most powerful nation.
We will support democracy from Asia to Africa, from the Americas to the Middle
East, because our interests and our conscience compel us to act on behalf of those
who long for freedom. And we must be a source of hope to the poor, the sick, the
marginalized, the victims of prejudice—not out of mere charity, but because peace in
our time requires the constant advance of those principles that our common creed
describes: tolerance and opportunity, human dignity and justice.
We, the people, declare today that the most evident of truths—that all of us are
created equal—is the star that guides us still; just as it guided our forebears through
Seneca Falls and Selma and Stonewall; just as it guided all those men and women,
sung and unsung, who left footprints along this great Mall, to hear a preacher say
that we cannot walk alone; to hear a King proclaim that our individual freedom is
inextricably bound to the freedom of every soul on Earth.
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 449 11/13/14 5:31 PM
450 Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
B
It is now our generation’s task to carry on what those pioneers began. For our
journey is not complete until our wives, our mothers, and daughters can earn a living
equal to their efforts. Our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters
are treated like anyone else under the law—for if we are truly created equal, is not
complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to exercise the right to vote. Our
journey is not complete until we find a better way to welcome the striving, hopeful
immigrants who still see America as a land of opportunity—until bright young students
and engineers are enlisted in our workforce rather than expelled from our country. Our
journey is not complete until all our children, from the streets of Detroit to the hills of
Appalachia, to the quiet lanes of Newtown, know that they are cared for and cherished
and always safe from harm.
That is our generation’s task—to make these words, these rights, these values of
life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness real for every American. Being true to our
founding documents does not require us to agree on every contour of life. It does not
mean we all define liberty in exactly the same way or follow the same precise path to
happiness. Progress does not compel us to settle centuries-long debates about the
role of government for all time, but it does require us to act in our time.
For now decisions are upon us and we cannot afford delay. We cannot mistake
absolutism for principle or substitute spectacle for politics or treat name-calling as
reasoned debate. We must act, knowing that our work will be imperfect. We must act,
we must act knowing that today’s victories will be only partial and that it will be up to
those who stand here in 4 years and 40 years and 400 years hence to advance the
timeless spirit once conferred to us in a spare Philadelphia hall.
My fellow Americans, the oath I have sworn before you today, like the one recited by
others who serve in this Capitol, was an oath to God and country, not party or faction.
And we must faithfully execute that pledge during the duration of our service. But the
words I spoke today are not so different from the oath that is taken each time a soldier
signs up for duty or an immigrant realizes her dream. My oath is not so different from the
pledge we all make to the flag that waves above and that fills our hearts with pride.
They are the words of citizens and they represent our greatest hope. You and I, as
citizens, have the power to set this country’s course. You and I, as citizens, have the
obligation to shape the debates of our time—not only with the votes we cast, but with
the voices we lift in defense of our most ancient values and enduring ideals.
Let us, each of us, now embrace with solemn duty and awesome joy what is
our lasting birthright. With common effort and common purpose, with passion and
dedication, let us answer the call of history and carry into an uncertain future that
precious light of freedom.
Thank you. God bless you, and may He forever bless these United States of America.
Message. Messenger. Audience.3
by Daniel Rose, October 15, 2012
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears. I come to bury Caesar, not to praise
him. The evil that men do lives after them. The good is oft interred with their bones. So
let it be with Caesar.
That’s how Shakespeare opens one of history’s greatest speeches. What a beginning!
And gentlemen in England now a-bed shall think themselves accursed they were not
here, and hold their manhoods cheap whilst any speaks that fought with us upon Saint
Crispin’s day.
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 450 11/13/14 5:31 PM
451
Speeches for Analysis and Discussion B
That’s how he ends another of the world’s most memorable orations.
I know not what course others may take, but as for me, give me liberty or give me death.
Patrick Henry’s ending is part of our national heritage.
That is how great speeches are constructed. A strong beginning, a convincing
middle and a rousing end, delivered with conviction by a speaker with authority, whose
goal is to convince an audience open to persuasion. At the moment, this seems a lost
art. The speeches at this year’s Republican and Democratic National Conventions—
with the exception of Bill Clinton’s rousing performance and a few others— reflect what
has happened to public speaking in America. Angry polemic, gracelessly expressed,
delivered to already-converted partisans, is standard fare. A nation moved by Lincoln at
Gettysburg and by FDR’s fireside chats, by Jack Kennedy’s asking what we can do for
our country and by Lyndon Johnson’s proclaiming that “we shall overcome” deserves
better.
Effective public speaking is not rocket science. Twenty-five hundred years ago
Aristotle observed that credibility (ethos), logic (logos) and emotion (pathos) underlay all
good speeches, and that vivid images and appropriate use of figures of speech would
reach the hearts and minds of a targeted audience. Few of us are called upon, like
Winston Churchill in 1940, to revive the self-confidence of a nation, or like Joan of Arc,
to encourage one’s compatriots as she was being burned at the stake. We may be
father of the bride or maid of honor, eulogist at a funeral, commencement speaker or
recipient of an honor; the basic rules remain the same.
Suiting the talk to the occasion is common sense (“decorum” the ancients called
it), but many a best man does not realize that the bawdy joke well-received at a
bachelor party is in poor taste at the wedding; or as Mitt Romney discovered, the “47
percent” comment that went over well with “true believers” was a disaster before a
broader audience.
Good “delivery”—what Demosthenes called the first, second and third
requirements for a great speech—has become rare in American life. Nine out of ten
of us mumble to the front row rather than boom out to the back row. Many nervously
speak quickly before an audience rather than use the slower pace that experts
recommend. Good speakers use judicious pauses for emphasis and dramatic impact,
raising or lowering the voice as indicated.
Some techniques used by experts can be dangerous for amateurs. In the Carter–
Reagan presidential debate, for example, when Carter passionately leveled his fiercest
attack, Reagan chuckled, threw his head back and said, “There you go again!” The
audience exploded with laughter, and the election was over. An amateur should not
try this. Debates, essays and speeches are different art forms. The Mitt Romney who
bored his public with his convention acceptance speech energized them at the first
presidential debate, while the reverse was the case with President Obama. Ronald
Reagan and Bill Clinton excelled at both forms, while neither could write a decent
essay.
When, in the spring of 1963, our friend Bayard Rustin invited my wife and me to
have dinner with him and Martin Luther King, Jr., we had just been deeply moved by
reading MLK’s extraordinary Letter From Birmingham Jail, one of the most powerful
and eloquent missives of all time. Denied stationery in his cell, King poured out his
thoughts on toilet paper and in the margins of newspapers, while Birmingham Police
Chief Bull Connor (a name out of Restoration comedy) turned fire hoses and police
dogs on non-violent protesters. King’s letter was a reply to eight white clergymen who
called his actions “unwise and untimely.” King’s evocation of St. Paul and of Socrates,
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 451 11/13/14 5:31 PM
452 Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
B
Aquinas and Martin Buber—his citing Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego’s refusal to
obey the laws of Nebuchadnezzar—and his portrayal of the terror and despair of black
children throughout the South, should be required reading in every American school.
When we gave our contribution to help plan the Washington protest for later that
summer, I hid my fear that bringing together vast numbers of Civil Rights activists and
red-necked southern police could result in a counterproductive riot. The Reverend
was certain that the event’s tone would be spiritual. And his “I Have a Dream” speech
became one of our nation’s greatest orations. “I Have a Dream” has been called the most
important and influential speech of the 20th century. Addressing a transfixed audience,
standing resolutely, his back to the Lincoln Memorial, King began his speech with, “Five
score years ago, a great American, in whose symbolic shadow we stand today, signed
the Emancipation Proclamation.” What a man, what a setting, what an opening!
After evoking the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution as
“promissory notes,” he declared that America had defaulted, the check had come
back marked “insufficient funds”; and he proclaimed (like Amos in the Old Testament)
that he would not be satisfied until, “justice rolls down like waters and righteousness
like a mighty stream.” He went on to describe his dream (“deeply rooted in the
American Dream”), echoing the powerful resonance of the Biblical Isaiah. He cited
“My Country ’tis of Thee” and finished with the old Negro spiritual refrain “Free at last!
Free at last! Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!” And the nation responded by
supporting Lyndon Johnson’s Civil Rights legislation.
In the classical world, Aeschines warned the Athenian Assembly of threats from
Philip II of Macedon, and everyone commented on how eloquently Aeschines spoke.
Demosthenes then rose to give his Philippic, and the Assembly shouted, “Let us march
against Philip!”
Studying memorable speeches can be helpful, and educational as well.
The greatest secular speech of all time, Pericles’ Funeral Oration, as reported by
Thucydides 2,600 years ago, conveys ideas we would do well to ponder today.
Think of our Millionaires’ Congress: Pericles says, “Advancement in public life falls to
reputation for capacity, class considerations not being allowed to interfere with merit;
nor does poverty bar the way. If a man is able to serve the state, he is not hindered by
the obscurity of his condition.” Consider the mega yachts of our hedge funders on the
political right, as Pericles notes, “We cultivate refinement without extravagance and
knowledge without effeminacy; wealth we employ more for use than for show.” How
many on our political left could dispute his point that, “The real disgrace of poverty is
not in owning to the fact but in declining the struggle against it.”
Lou Gehrig’s “Farewell to Baseball,” at which I cried as a young boy, expressed a
modesty, a gratitude for the good things life had given him, that is unthinkable from our
gladiators of today.
Studying failures—or lost opportunities—may be even more helpful to mistake-prone
amateurs. Studying great “saves” can be instructive, too. Richard Nixon’s emotional
“Checkers” speech, for example, effectively ended talk of the embarrassing “Nixon Scandal
Fund.” Mitt Romney’s self-confident, authoritative manner in the first Presidential debate of
2012, his eye-contact with the audience and his smiling gazes at his adversary, did much
in the audience’s view to overcome the weakness of his argument.
The failure of Obama’s advisors and “handlers” to prepare him adequately for the
first debate will be notable in political history. David Axelrod, Obama’s chief advisor,
noted after the debate, “The president showed up with the intent of answering
questions and having a discussion. Romney showed up to deliver a performance, and
he delivered a very good performance.” As Reagan’s speechwriter Peggy Noonan
said years ago, “A speech is part theater and part political declaration,” and Axelrod
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 452 11/13/14 5:31 PM
453
Speeches for Analysis and Discussion B
should have listened. When Axelrod was asked why Obama did not address Romney’s
“47 percent” gaffe, he replied, “The president obviously didn’t see the appropriate
opportunity.” The appropriate opportunity? O’s opening statement could have
been, “Governor Romney is concerned about some of us; I am concerned about all
Americans, including the 47 percent.”
O’s talk petered out. My suggestion for an ending would have been: “We have
started the recovery from the disaster we inherited; with your support we will finish
it.” Michelle Obama’s convention speech was widely praised, and the audience came
away feeling that this good woman loved her husband. Necessary but not sufficient! I
would have added to her remarks: “The man I live with may look calm, but he spends
sleepless nights over our casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan, and agonizes over students
who can’t find jobs and unemployed workers whose insurance is running out.”
Martin Luther King, Jr. wrote his own sermons and speeches. John F. Kennedy’s
were written by Ted Sorensen, Ronald Reagan’s were by Peggy Noonan, Barack
Obama’s by Jon Favreau. Franklin Roosevelt corrected his own talks, but the first
drafts were written by skilled writers like Sam Rosenman, Robert Sherwood, Archibald
Macleish, and others. If you get help for a major talk, or have someone prepare a draft,
you are in good company. But writing your own material can not only be fun, but also
educational. E.M. Forster’s comment, “How do I know what I think until I hear what I
say?” states it clearly.
Plunge in and write your own; but remember Aristotle’s ethos, logos and
pathos; Cicero’s decorum; Demosthenes’ delivery; and the one attribute of all great
speeches—say something worth saying!
Elvis4
by Angelitta Armijo, Texas State University
Can you imagine being a singer with 150 different albums and singles that have been
certified gold, platinum, or multiplatinum? Neither can I. But according to Elvis.com,
that’s the reality for Elvis Presley.
Although Elvis is no longer with us, his influence on the rock industry remains
prevalent today. After all, he paved the way for groups such as the Beatles and Led
Zeppelin. I personally have been an Elvis fan for as long as I can remember. I grew up on
him, and I own many of his albums on CD, cassette, and vinyl. I also own every movie
that he’s ever starred in, including some of his TV specials, which I’ll talk about later.
Elvis Presley was an American kid who grew up on the wrong side of the tracks
and later became the King of Rock-n-Roll. To better understand Elvis, you need to
know about his early days of life before he was famous, his early career, and his shift in
career focus, which was prevalent until the end of his life.
Let’s begin with Elvis’s humble beginnings. Elvis was born into a poor family, but he
kept his eyes on his dreams and his love of music. Elvis Aaron Presley was born January
8, 1935, in Tupelo, Mississippi, to Gladys and Vernon Presley. Actually, Elvis was born
as a twin, but his brother, Jesse Garon, died at birth, leaving Elvis to be raised as an
only child, according to the A&E Network. Also according to A&E Network, Elvis was
very dedicated to his family and especially to his mother, whom he loved very much. His
family encouraged him to be active in church, and it was in church that he discovered his
love of singing and music. When he was ten years old, he received his first guitar, and
throughout his childhood and young adult life, he was involved in many talent shows.
According to Elvis.com, the family moved to Memphis in 1948 to seek financial
security and job security. Soon after graduating high school in 1953 in Memphis, Elvis
became a truck driver. It was during his truck-driving years that Elvis recorded a few
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 453 11/13/14 5:31 PM
454 Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
B
songs at Sun Records for his mother for her birthday. It was at Sun Records where
his career began, because Sam Phillips asked him to record more songs, in hopes of
finding a star.
So now that you know about Elvis’s beginnings, we can discuss his rise to fame
and early successes. Elvis’s career began at Sun Records and grew as his fans wanted
to see him on stage, on TV, and on the silver screen. According to Rolling Stone, one
of the recordings requested by Sam Phillips, “That’s Alright Mama,” became Elvis’s
first single in 1954. This single, and many of Elvis’s other singles, showed the influence
of blues music, which he discovered in Memphis. By 1955, Elvis was signed to RCA,
a premier record label. In 1956, his first album was released, titled Elvis Presley.
According to Elvis.com, this record was #1 on the Billboard Pop Charts for 10 weeks
and was also Elvis’s first gold album, selling over a million copies.
Throughout the rest of the ’50s, Elvis appeared on many variety shows such as
the Ed Sullivan Show and starred in his first movie, Love Me Tender. In 1960, after two
years in the army, Elvis taped a special Welcome Home Elvis edition of Frank Sinatra’s
TV show. He received $125,000 for appearing on the show—which, according to
Elvis.com, was a record sum of money for an appearance at that time. According
to IMDb, Elvis released 27 films throughout the ’60s. This was obviously his career
focus at that time. He also put out many soundtracks for these movies; some of them
include GI Blues, Blue Hawaii, and Viva Las Vegas.
After covering Elvis’s early life and career, we can now discuss his career change.
The obvious shift from movies to music came with Elvis’s 1968 Comeback Tour
Special, initially entitled Elvis. Elvis used the 1968 Comeback Special to be taken
more seriously, and he ended the special on a personal note, by closing with the
song If I Can Dream. This song was in response to the tragedies that had occurred
in the 1960s, such as the assassination of JFK, Martin Luther King Jr., and Bobby
Kennedy, all men whom Elvis respected. This was a sign he was ready to be taken
more seriously. His movies changed as well; he finished up his acting career with a few
movies that were less cheesy and had more serious plots.
In 1973, Elvis made history. His Aloha from Hawaii Special was broadcast via
satellite to 40 countries and viewed by 1 to 1.5 billion people, according to Elvis.com.
Also according to Elvis.com, 51 percent of Americans viewed the Aloha from Hawaii
Special. That means it was seen in more American households than the walk on the
moon was! Elvis continued to sell out shows and venues such as Madison Square
Garden and Las Vegas until his career ended in 1977 with his death.
You can see that Elvis’s life is something for the history books. He came from
humble beginnings and catapulted himself into a thriving career to become the King
of Rock-n-Roll. Now you know about his life before fame, his early fame and rise to
stardom, and a career shift that he focused on. Now—as Elvis would say—”Thank
you, thank you very much.”
Z02_BEEB3981_05_SE_APPB_445-454.indd 454 11/13/14 5:31 PM
Chapter 1  Introduction to Public Speaking
	 1.	 Charles Schwab, as quoted in Brent Filson, Executive
Speeches: Tips on How to Write and Deliver Speeches from 51
CEOs (New York: Wiley, 1994) 45.
	 2.	 Louis Nizer, “Reflections Without Mirrors,” as quoted
in Jack Valenti, Speak Up with Confidence: How to Prepare,
Learn, and Deliver Effective Speeches (New York: Morrow,
1982) 34.
	 3.	 Adetokunbo F. Knowles-Borishade, “Paradigm for
Classical African Orature,” Christine Kelly et al., eds.,
­
Diversity in Public Communication: A Reader (Dubuque,
IA: Kendall-Hunt, 1994) 10; Patricia A. Sullivan, “Signi-
fication and ­
African-American Rhetoric: A Case Study of
Jesse ­
Jackson’s ‘Common Ground and Common Sense’
Speech,” Communication Quarterly 41, 1 (1993): 1–15.
	 4.	 Judy C. Pearson, Jeffrey T. Child, and David H. Kahl,
Jr., “Preparation Meeting Opportunity: How Do College
­
Students Prepare for Public Speeches?” Communication
Quarterly 54, 3 (August 2006): 351–66.
	 5.	 James C. Humes, The Sir Winston Method: Five Secrets of
Speaking the Language of Leadership (New York: Morrow,
1991) 13–14.
	 6.	 Dee-Ann Durbin, “Study: Plenty of Jobs for Graduates in
2000,” Austin American-Statesman 5 December 1999: A28.
	 7.	 Dan B. Curtis, Jerry L. Winsor, and Ronald D. Stephens,
“National Preferences in Business and Communication
Education,” Communication Education 38 (January 1989):
6–14. See also Iain Hay, “Justifying and Applying Oral
Presentations in Geographical Education,” Journal of Geog-
raphy in Higher Education 18, 1 (1994): 44–45.
	 8.	 Value Investors portal. “Warren Buffet on Communication
Skills,” YouTube (December 6, 2010).­
Accessed May 14, 2013,
from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tpgcEYpLzP0
	 9.	 Jerry L. Winsor, Dan B. Curtis, and Ronald D. Stephens,
“National Preferences in Business and Communication
Education: A Survey Update,” Journal of the Association for
Communication Administration (September 3, 1997): 174.
	10.	 University of Wisconsin–River Falls, Career Services,
“What Skills and Attributes Employers Seek When
Hiring Students,” (June 4, 2007). http://www.uwrf.edu/
ccs/skills/htm
	 11.	 CamilleLuckenbaughandKevinGray,“EmployersDescribe
Perfect Job Candidate,” National Association of Col-
leges and Employers Survey. (June 4, 2007). http://www
.naceweb.org/press/display.asp?year=2003&prid=169
	12.	 Randall S. Hansen and Katharine Handson, “What Do
Employers Really Want? Top Skills and Values Employ-
ers Seek from Job-Seekers.” (June 4, 2007). http://www
.quintcareers.com/job_skills_values.html
	13.	 L. M. Boyd, syndicated column, Austin American-
Statesman 8 August 2000: E3.
	14.	 Herman Cohen, The History of Speech Communication:
The Emergence of a Discipline: 1914–1945 (Annandale, VA:
Speech Communication Association, 1994) 2.
	15.	 Barack Obama, “Remarks by the President at Sandy Hook
Interfaith Prayer Vigil,” The White House Briefing Room.
(December 16, 2012). Accessed July 5, 2013, from http://
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/12/16/
remarks-president-sandy-hook-interfaith-prayer-vigil
Chapter 2  Speaking with Confidence
	 1.	 Survey conducted by R. H. Bruskin and Associates, Spec-
tra 9 (December 1973): 4; D. Wallechinsky, Irving Wallace,
and Amy Wallace, The People’s Almanac Presents the Book of
Lists (New York: Morrow, 1977).
	 2.	 K. K. Dwyer and M. M. Davidson, “Is Public Speaking
Really More Feared Than Death?” Communication Research
Reports 29, 2 (April–June 2012): 99–107.
	 3.	 Steven Booth-Butterfield, “Instructional Interventions for
Reducing Situational Anxiety and Avoidance,” Commu-
nication Education 37 (July 1988): 214–23; also see Michael
Motley, Overcoming Your Fear of Public Speaking: A Proven
Method (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995).
	 4.	 Joe Ayres and Theodore S. Hopf, “The Long-Term Effect
of Visualization in the Classroom: A Brief Research
Report,” Communication Education 39 (1990): 75–8.
	 5.	 Leon Fletcher, How to Design and Deliver Speeches (New
York: Longman, 2001) 3.
	 6.	 John Burk, “Communication Apprehension Among Mas-
ters of Business Administration Students: Investigating a
Gap in Communication Education,” Communication Edu-
cation 50 (January 2001): 51–8; Lynne Kelly and James A.
Keaten, “Treating Communication Anxiety: Implications
of the Communibiological Paradigm,” Communication
Education 49 (January 2000): 45–57; Amber N. Finn, Chris
R. Sawyer, and Ralph R. Behnke, “Audience-Perceived
Anxiety Patterns of Public Speakers,” Communication
Quarterly 51 (Fall 2003): 470–81.
	 7.	 Kelly and Keaten, “Treating Communication Anxiety.”
	 8.	 Amy M. Bippus and John A. Daly, “What Do People
Think Causes Stage Fright? Naïve Attributions About the
Reasons for Public-Speaking Anxiety,” Communication
Education 48 (January 1999): 63–72.
	 9.	 Yang Lin and Andrew S. Rancer, “Sex Differences in Inter-
cultural Communication Apprehension, Ethnocentrism,
and Intercultural Willingness to Communicate,” Psycho-
logical Reports 92 (2003): 195–200.
	10.	 S. S. Shimotsu and T. P. Mottet, “The Relationships Among
Perfectionism, Communication, Apprehension, and Temper-
ament,” Communication Research Reports 26, 3 (2009): 188–97.
	11.	 Graham D. Bodie, “A Racing Heart, Rattling Knees, and
Ruminative Thoughts: Defining, Explaining, and Treat-
ing Public Speaking Anxiety,” Communication Education 59
(January 2010): 70–105.
	12.	 Amber N. Finn, Chris R. Sawyer, and Paul Schrodt,
“Examining the Effect of Exposure Therapy on Public
Speaking State Anxiety,” Communication Education 58
(2009): 92–109.
Notes
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 455 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
456
	13.	 Judy C. Pearson, Lori DeWitt, Jeffery T. Child, David
H. Kahl, and Vijay Dandamudi, “Facing the Fear: An
Analysis of Speech-Anxiety Content in Public-Speaking
Textbooks,” Communication Research Reports 24 (2007):
159–68: G. D. Bodie, “A Racing Heart, Rattling Knees, and
Ruminative Thoughts: Defining and Explaining ­
Public
Speaking Anxiety,” Communication Education 59 (2010):
70–105.
	14.	 Michael J. Beatty, James C. McCroskey, and A. D.
Heisel, “Communication Apprehension as Tempera-
mental Expression: A Communibiological Paradigm,”
Communication Monographs 65 (1998): 197–219; Michael
J. Beatty and Kristin Marie Valencic, “Context-Based
Apprehension Versus Planning Demands:ACommunibio-
logical Analysis of Anticipatory Public Speaking Anxiety,”
Communication Education 49 (January 2000): 58–71.
	15.	 Kay B. Harris, Chris R. Sawyer, and Ralph R. Behnke,
“Predicting Speech State Anxiety from Trait Anxiety,
Reactivity, and Situational Influences,” Communication
Quarterly 54 (2006): 213–26.
	16.	 Kay B. Harris, Chris R. Sawyer, and Ralph R. Behnke,
“Predicting Speech State Anxiety from Trait Anxiety,
Reactivity, and Situational Influences,” Communication
Quarterly 54 (May 2006): 213–26.
	17.	 Kelly and Keaten, “Treating Communication Anxiety.”
	18.	 Maili Porhola, “Orientation Styles in a Public-Speaking
Context,” paper presented at the National Commu-
nication Association convention, Seattle, Washington
(November 2000); Ralph R. Behnke and Michael J. Beatty,
“A Cognitive-Physiological Model of Speech Anxiety,”
Communication Monographs 48 (1981): 158–63.
	19.	 Shannon C. McCullough, Shelly G. Russell, Ralph R.
Behnke, Chris R. Sawyer, and Paul L. Witt, “Anticipatory
Public Speaking Anxiety as a Function of Body Sensations
and State of Mind,” Communication Quarterly 54 (April
2004): 164–73.
	20.	 Ralph R. Behnke and Chris R. Sawyer, “Public Speak-
ing Anxiety as a Function of Sensitization and Habitua-
tion Processes,” Communication Research Reports 53 (April
2004): 164–73.
	21.	 Ralph R. Behnke and Chris R. Sawyer, “Public Speaking
Anxiety as a Function of Public Speaking Assignment
Type,” Communication Education 55 (2006): 167–77.
	22.	 Maili Porhola, “Arousal Styles During Public Speaking,”
Communication Education 51 (October 2002): 420–38.
	23.	 Kelly and Keaten, “Treating Communication Anxiety.”
	24.	 Research suggests that because public-speaking anxiety
is complex (both a trait and a state), with multiple and
idiosyncratic causes, using a combination of intervention
strategies may be best in attempting to manage communi-
cation apprehension. See Bodie, “A Racing Heart, Rattling
Knees, and Ruminative Thoughts.”
	25.	 Desiree C. Duff, Timothy R. Levine, Michael J. Beatty,
Jessica Woolbright, and Hee Sun Park, “Testing Public
Anxiety Treatments Against a Credible Placebo Control,”
Communication Education 56 (January 2007): 72–88.
	26.	 Peter D. MacIntyre and J. Renee MacDonald, “Public-
Speaking Anxiety: Perceived Competence and Audi-
ence Congeniality,” Communication Education 47 (October
1998): 359–65.
	27.	 Ralph R. Behnke and Chris R. Sawyer, “Public-Speaking
Procrastination as a Correlate of Public-Speaking Communi-
cation Apprehension and Self-Perceived Public-Speaking
Competence,” Communication Research Reports 16 (1999):
40–47.
	28.	 Quoted by Petula Dvorak, “Channeling the Grief,” Austin
American-Statesman (October 14, 2009): A9.
	29.	 Dvorak, “Channeling the Grief.”
	30.	 Joe Ayres, Terry Schliesman, and Debbie Ayres Sonandre,
“Practice Makes Perfect but Does It Help Reduce Com-
munication Apprehension?” Communication Research
Reports 15 (Spring 1998): 170–79.
	31.	 Melanie Booth-Butterfield, “Stifle or Stimulate? The
Effects of Communication Task Structure on Apprehen-
sive and Non-Apprehensive Students,” Communication
Education 35 (October 1986): 337–48.
	32.	 Joe Ayres and Tanichya K. Wongprasert, “Measuring the
Impact of Visualization on Mental Imagery: Compar-
ing Prepared versus Original Drawings,” Communication
Research Reports 28 (Winter 2003): 45–53.
	33.	 Joe Ayres and Theodore S. Hopf, “Visualization: A Means
of Reducing Speech Anxiety,” Communication Educa-
tion 34 (October 1985): 318–23. Although researchers
have found evidence that visualization is helpful, some
question whether visualization techniques work better
than just gaining experience in public speaking. Critics
of systematic desensitization argue that there may be a
placebo effect: Just thinking that a treatment will reduce
apprehension may contribute to reduced apprehension.
See Duff, Levine, Beatty, Woolbright, and Park, “Testing
Public Anxiety Treatments Against a Credible Placebo
Control.”
	34.	 Ayres and Wongprasert, “Measuring the Impact of Visu-
alization on Mental Imagery.”
	35.	 Joe Ayres and Debbie M. Ayres Sonandre, “Performance
Visualization:DoestheNatureoftheSpeechModelMatter?”
Communication Research Reports 20 (Summer 2003): 260–68.
	36.	 Ayres and Wongprasert, “Measuring the Impact of Visu-
alization on Mental Imagery.”
	37.	 Duff, Levine, Beatty, Woolbright, and Park, “Testing Public
Anxiety Treatments Against a Credible Placebo Control.”
	38.	 Joe Ayres and Brian L. Heuett, “An Examination of the
Impact of Performance Visualization,” Communication
Research Reports 16 (1999): 29–39.
	39.	 Penny Addison, Ele Clay, Shuang Xie, Chris R. Sawyer,
and Ralph R. Behnke, “Worry as a Function of Public
Speaking State Anxiety Type,” Communication Reports 16
(Summer 2003): 125–31.
	40.	 Chad Edwards and Suzanne Walker, “Using Public
Speaking Learning Communities to Reduce Commu-
nication Apprehension,” Texas Speech Communication
Journal 32 (2007): 65–71; also see Chia-Fang (Sandy) Hsu,
“The Relationship of Trait Anxiety, Audience Nonverbal
Feedback, and Attributions to Public Speaking State
Anxiety,” Communication Research Reports 26, 3 (August
2009): 237–46.
	41.	 Diane Honour, “Speech Performance Anxiety for Non-
Native Speakers,” The Florida Communication Journal 36
(2007): 57–66.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 456 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes ﻿ 457
	42.	 G. M. Hodis, N. R. Bardhan, and F. A. Hodis, “Patterns of
Change in Willingness to Communicate in Public Speak-
ing Contexts: A Latent Growth Modeling Analysis,”
Journal of Applied Communication Research 38, 3 (2010):
248–67.
	43.	 Amber N. Finn, Chris R. Sawyer, and Paul Schrodt,
“Examining the Effects of Exposure Therapy on Public
Speaking State Anxiety.” Communication Education 58
(2009): 92–109.
	44.	 MacIntyre and MacDonald, “Public-Speaking Anxiety”;
R. B. Rubin, A. M. Rubin, and F. F. Jordan, “Effects of
Instruction on Communication Apprehension and Com-
munication Competence,” Communication Education 46
(April 1997): 104–14.
	45.	 Lisa M. Schroeder, “The Effects of Skills Training on Com-
munication Satisfaction and Communication Anxiety in
the Basic Speech Course,” Communication Research Reports
19 (2002): 380–88; Alain Morin, “History of Exposure to
Audiences as a Developmental Antecedent of Public Self-
Consciousness,” Current Research in Social Psychology 5
(March 2000): 33–46.
	46.	 MacIntyre and MacDonald, “Public-Speaking Anxiety”;
Peter D. MacIntyre and K. A. Thivierge, “The Effects
of Audience Pleasantness, Audience Familiarity, and
Speaking Contexts on Public-Speaking Anxiety and Will-
ingness to Speak,” Communication Quarterly 43 (1995):
456–66; Peter D. MacIntyre, K. A. Thivierge, and J. Renee
MacDonald, “The Effects of Audience Interest, Respon-
siveness, and Evaluation on Public-Speaking Anxiety and
Related Variables,” Communication Research Reports 14
(1997): 157–68.
Chapter 3  Presenting Your First Speech
	 1.	 The late Waldo Braden, longtime professor of speech
communication at Louisiana State University, presented
a memorable speech at the 1982 Florida Speech Commu-
nication Association in which he emphasized that “the
audience writes the speech” to indicate the importance of
being an audience-centered speaker.
	 2.	 J. C. Pearson, J. T. Child, and D. H. Kahl, Jr., “Preparation
Meeting Opportunity: How Do College Students Pre-
pare for Public Speeches?” Communication Quarterly 54, 3
(August 2006): 351–66.
	 3.	 Clifford Stoll, as cited by Kevin A. Miller, “Capture: The
Essential Survival Skill for Leaders Buckling Under Infor-
mation Overload,” Leadership (Spring 1992): 85.
	 4.	 Don Hewitt, interview broadcast on 60 Minutes (January 24,
2010).
	 5.	 Greg Winter, “The Chips Are Down: Frito-Lay Cuts Costs
with Smaller Servings,” Austin American-Statesman (January
2, 2001): A6.
	 6.	 These statistics are from an Allstate Insurance advertise-
ment, The New York Times (February 17, 2010): A24.
	 7.	 We thank Barbara Patton of Texas State University for
sharing her speech outline with us.
	 8.	 Pearson, Child, and Kahl, “Preparation Meeting Opportu-
nity.”
	 9.	 Grace Hildenbrand, “Cinderella,” Texas State University
student speech, 2013.
Chapter 4  Speaking Freely and Ethically
	 1.	 Jason Pontin, “Free Speech in the Era of Its Technologi-
cal Amplification,” MIT Technology Review 116.2 (March/
April 2013): 62.
	 2.	 National Communication Association, “NCA Credo for
Communication Ethics.” 1999. 27 June 2001. http://www
.natcom.org/conferences/Ethics/ethicsconfcredo99.htm.
	 3.	 “Obama Counter-Terrorism Speech Interrupted by Heckler,”
UPI.com. 23 May 2013.
	 4.	 Samuel Walker, Hate Speech (Lincoln: U of Nebraska P,
1994) 162.
	 5.	 “Libel and Slander.” The Ethical Spectacle. 1 June 1997.
1 June 1998. http://www.spectacle.org/freespch/musm/
libel.html.
	 6.	 “Three Decades Later, Free Speech Vets Return to UC
Berkeley,” Sacramento Bee 3 December 1994: A1.
	 7.	 James S. Tyre, “Legal Definition of Obscenity, Pornogra-
phy.” 1 June 1997. 1 June 1998 http://internet.ggu.edu/
university_library/reg/_legal_obscene.html.
	 8.	 “Supreme Court Rules: Cyberspace Will Be Free! ACLU
Hails Victory in Internet Censorship Challenge.” American
Civil Liberties Union Freedom Network. 26 June 1997.
1 June 1998 http://www.aclu.org/news/no62697a.html.
	 9.	 Sue Anne Pressley, “Oprah Winfrey Wins Case Filed
by Cattlemen,” Washington Post 27 February 1998.
1 June 1998 http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/
WPlate/1998-02/27/1001022798-idx.html.
	10.	 Associated Press, “Free-Speech, Other Groups File
Briefs Opposing Patriot Act.” 4 November 2003. 13 June
2004. http://www.firstamendmentcenter.org/news
.aspx?id=12174.
	11.	 Brian Schweitzer, “Proclamation of Clemency for Mon-
tanans Convicted Under the Montana Sedition Act in
1918–1919.” 3 May 2006. (Thanks to George Moss, Vaughn
College, Flushing, New York, for providing the authors
with a copy of this document.)
	12.	 Terry Phillips, “Opinion: In Defense of Free Speech and
Helen Thomas,” MercuryNews.com. 15 June 2010. 21 June
2010. http://www.mercurynews.com/ci_15303135.
	13.	 Bill Carter and Felicity Barringer, “Patriotic Time, Dissent
Is Muted,” New York Times 28 September 2001: B8.
	14.	 Walker, Hate Speech, 2.
	15.	 Daniel Downs and Gloria Cowan, “Predicting the Impor-
tance of Freedom of Speech and the Perceived Harm of
Hate Speech,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 42.6
(June 2012): 1372.
	16.	 Edwin R. Bayley, Joe McCarthy and the Press (Madison:
Wisconsin UP, 1981) 29.
	17.	 Chidsey Dickson, “Re: Question.” Online posting.
27 October 2005. WPA Listserv. 27 October 2005. http://
lists.asu.edu/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind0510&L=WPA-L&P=
R117883&I=-3.
	18.	 “Spurlock Sorry for Speech,” Austin American-Statesman
29 March 2006: A2.
	19.	 Kathy Fitzpatrick, “U.S. Public Diplomacy,” Vital Speeches
of the Day (15 April 2004): 412–17.
	20.	 Peg Tyre, “Improving on History,” Newsweek 2 July 2001:
34.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 457 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
458
	21.	 Publication Manual of the American Psychological Associa-
tion, 4th ed. (Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, 1994) 294.
	22.	 Scott Jaschik, “Graduation Shame,” Insidehighered.com.
22 April 2010. 21 June 2010. http://www.insidehighered
.com/lyout/set/print/news/2010/04/22/conncoll.
	23.	 The Fundamental Values of Academic Integrity (Duke Uni-
versity: Center for Academic Integrity, October 1999) 1–2.
	24.	 Non-Plagiarized College Term Papers.com, 1996–2011.
07 April 2011. http://www.non-plagiarized-termpapers
.com.
	25.	 Todd Holm, “Public Speaking Students’ Perceptions of
Cheating,” Communication Research Reports (Winter 2002):
70.
	26.	 Waldo W. Braden, Abraham Lincoln, Public Speaker (Baton
Rouge: Louisiana State UP, 1988) 90.
Chapter 5  Listening to Speeches
	 1.	 Study conducted by Paul Cameron, as cited in Ronald B.
Adler and Neil Town, Looking Out/Looking In: Interpersonal
Communications (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1981) 218.
	 2.	 R. R. Brunner, “Listening, Communication & Trust: Prac-
titioners’ Perspectives of Business/Organizational Rela-
tionships,” The International Journal of Listening 22 (2009):
123–32.
	 3.	 L. Boyd, syndicated column, Austin American-Statesman 7
December 1995: E7.
	 4.	 John T. Masterson, Steven A. Beebe, and Norman H. Wat-
son, Invitation to Effective Speech Communication (Glenview:
Scott, Foresman, 1989) 4.
	 5.	 Laura Ann Janusik, “Building Listening Theory: The Vali-
dation of the Conversational Listening Span,” Communica-
tion Studies 58.2 (2007): 139–56.
	 6.	 Frank E. X. Dance, Speaking Your Mind: Private Thinking
and Public Speaking (Dubuque: Kendall/Hunt Publishing
Company, 1994).
	 7.	 Ralph G. Nichols and Leonard A. Stevens, “Six Bad Listen-
ing Habits,” in Are You Listening? (New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1957).
	 8.	 Albert Mehrabian, Nonverbal Communication (Hawthorne:
Aldine, 1972).
	 9.	 Paul Ekman and Wallace Friesen, “Head and Body Cues
in the Judgment of Emotion: A Reformulation,” Perceptual
and Motor Skills 25 (1967): 711–24.
	10.	 K. K. Halone and L. L. Pecchioni, “Relational Listening: A
Grounded Theoretical Model,” Communication Reports 14
(2001): 59–71.
	11.	 Halone and Pecchioni, “Relational Listening.”
	12.	 Paul Rankin, “Listening Ability: Its Importance, Measure-
ment and Development,” Chicago Schools Journal 12 (January
1930): 177–79.
	 13.	 R.Emmanuel,J.Adams,K.Baker,E.K.Daufin,C.Ellington,
F. Fits, J. Himsel, L. Holladay, and D. Okeowo, “How
College Students Spend Their Time Communicating,”
International Journal of Listening 22 (2008): 13–28.
	14.	 Nichols and Stevens, “Six Bad Listening Habits.”
	15.	 Kitty W. Watson, Larry L. Barker, and James B. Weaver, The
Listener Style Inventory (New Orleans: LA SPECTRA, 1995).
	16.	 G. D. Bodie, D. L. Worthington, and C. C. Gearhart, “The Lis-
tening Styles Profile-Revised (LSP-R): A Scale Revision and
Evidence for Validity,” Communication Quarterly 16 (2013):
72–90; S. L. Sargent and James B. Weaver, “Correlates Between
Communication Apprehension and Listening Style Prefer-
ences,” Communication Research Reports 14 (1997): 74–78.
	17.	 See Larry L. Barker and Kitty W. Watson, Listen Up (New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000); also see M. Imhof, “WhoAre
We as We Listen? Individual Listening Profiles in Varying
Contexts,” International Journal of Listening 18 (2004): 36–45.
	18.	 Sargeant and Weaver, “Correlates Between Communica-
tion Apprehension and Listening Style Preference.”
	19.	 D. L. Worthington, “Exploring the Relationship Between
Listening Style Preferences and Personality,” International
Journal of Listening 17 (2003): 68–87.
	20.	 M. D. Kirtley and J. M. Honeycutt, “Listening Styles and
Their Correspondence with Second Guessing,” Communi-
cation Research Reports 13 (1996): 174–82.
	21.	 Harold Barrett, Rhetoric and Civility: Human Development, Nar-
cissism, and the Good Audience (Albany: SUNY P, 1991) 154.
	22.	 Chad Edwards and Suzanne Walker, “Using Public Speaking
Learning Communities to Reduce Communication Appre-
hension,” Texas Speech Communication Journal 32 (2007): 65–71.
	
23.	Patricia Sullivan, “Signification and African-American
Rhetoric: A Case Study of Jesse Jackson’s ‘Common
Ground and Common Sense’ Speech,” Communication
Quarterly 41.1 (1993): 11.
	24.	 Cited in Marie Hochmuth, ed., AHistory and Criticism of Amer-
ican Public Address, Vol. 3, ed. Marie Hochmuth (New York:
Longmans, Green, 1955) 4; and in James R.Andrews, The Prac-
tice of Rhetorical Criticism (New York: Macmillan, 1983) 3–4.
	25.	 Mike Allen, Sandra Berkowitz, Steve Hunt, and Allan
Louden, “A Meta-Analysis of the Impact of Forensics and
Communication Education on Critical Thinking,” Commu-
nication Education 48 (January 1999): 18–30.
	26.	 For a comprehensive list of definitions of rhetoric, see Pa-
tricia Bizzell and Bruce Herzberg, eds., The Rhetorical Tra-
dition: Readings from Classical Times to the Present (Boston:
Bedford, 1990).
	27.	 Aristotle, On Rhetoric. Translated by George A. Kennedy
(New York: Oxford UP, 1991) 14.
	28.	 Andrews, The Practice of Rhetorical Criticism.
	29.	 Isocrates, Isocrates, Vol. II. Translated by George Norlin
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1929). Also see “Isocrates,”
in Bizzell and Herzberg, The Rhetorical Tradition.
	30.	 Masterson, Beebe, and Watson, Invitation to Effective Speech
Communication.
	31.	 Robert Rowland, Analyzing Rhetoric: A Handbook for the
Informed Citizen in a New Millennium (Dubuque: Kendall/
Hunt, 2002) 17–28.
Chapter 6  Analyzing Your Audience
	 1.	 Robert H. Farrell, ed., Off the Record: The Private Papers of
Harry S Truman (New York: Harper & Row, 1980) 310.
	 2.	 N. Howe and W. Strauss, Millennials Rising: The Next Great
Generation (New York: Vintage Books, 2000). Also see
Hank Karp, Connie Fuller, and Damilo Sirias, Bridging
the Boomer—Xer Gap: Creating Authentic Teams for High
Performance at Work (Palo Alto: Davies-Black, 2002).
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 458 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes ﻿ 459
	 3.	For an excellent review of gender and persuasibility
research, see Daniel J. O’Keefe, Persuasion: Theory and
Research (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990) 176–77. Also
see James B. Stiff, Persuasive Communication (New York:
Guilford Press, 1994) 133–36.
	4.	O’Keefe, Persuasion.
	 5.	 Gregory Herek, “Study Offers ‘Snapshot’ of Sacramento-
Area Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Community.” 23 July 2001
<http://psyweb.ucdavis.edu/rainbow/htmlsacramento
_study.html>. For an excellent review of literature about
sexual orientation and communication, see T. P. Mottet,
“The Role of Sexual Orientation in Predicting Outcome
Value and Anticipated Communication Behaviors,” Com-
munication Quarterly 48 (2000): 233–39.
	 6.	 See R. Lewontin, “The Apportionment of Human Diver-
sity,” Evolutionary Biology 6 (1973): 381–97; H. A. Yee, H. H.
Fairchild, F. Weizmann, and E. G. Wyatt, “Addressing Psy-
chology’s Problems with Race,” American Psychologist 48
(1994): 1132–40; D. Matsumoto and L. Juang, Culture and
Psychology (Belmont: Wadsworth/Thompson, 2004) 16.
	 7.	 The research summarized here is based on pioneering
work by Geert Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: Inter-
national Differences in Work-Related Values (Beverly Hills:
Sage, 1984). Also see Edward T. Hall, Beyond Culture
(New York: Doubleday, 1976).
	 8.	 Richard Perez-Pena, “U.S. Bachelor Degree Rate Passes
Milestone,” New York Times 23 February 2012. http://
www.nytimes.com/2012/02/24/education/census-
finds-bachelors-degrees-at-record-level.html?_r=0.
	 9.	 M. E. Ryan, “Another Way to Teach Migrant Students,”
Los Angeles Times 31 March 1991: B20, as cited in M. W.
Lustig and J. Koester, Intercultural Competence: Interpersonal
Communication Across Cultures (Boston: Allyn & Bacon,
2003) 11.
	10.	 G. Chen and W. J. Starosta, “A Review of the Concept of
Intercultural Sensitivity,” Human Communication 1 (1997):
7.
	11.	 U.S. Census Bureau. 8 February 2010. http://www.prb
.org/AmeristateTemplate.
	12.	 Susan Saulny, “Black? White? Asian? More Young Americans
Choose All of the Above,” New York Times, 30 January
2011: 1, 20–21.
	13.	 United States Census Bureau. http://www.census.gov/
newsroom/releases/archives/population/cb12-243.html.
	14.	 David W. Kale, “Ethics in Intercultural Communication,”
in Intercultural Communication: A Reader, 6th ed., eds. Larry
A. Samovar and Richard E. Porter (Belmont: Wadsworth,
1991) 423; also see the discussion in Lustig and Koester,
Intercultural Competence.
	
15.	
Donald E. Brown, “Human Universals and Their
­Implications,” in Being Humans: Anthropological ­
Universality
and Particularity in Transdisciplinary ­
Perspectives, ed. N.
­
Roughley (New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2000). ­
Reprinted
by permission. For an applied discussion of these
­
universals, see Steven Pinker, The Blank Slate: The Modern
Denial of Human Nature (London: Penguin Books, 2002).
	16.	 Larry A. Samovar and Richard E. Porter, Communication
Between Cultures (Stamford: Wadsworth and Thomson
Learning, 2001) 29.
	17.	 Henry Sweets, “Mark Twain in India,” The Fence Painter:
Bulletin of the Mark Twain Boyhood Home Associates 26
(Winter 1996): 1.
	18.	 For an excellent discussion of how to adapt to specific
audience situations, see Jo Sprague and Douglas Stuart,
The Speaker’s Handbook (Fort Worth: Harcourt, Brace,
Jovanovich, 1992) 345.
	19.	 Devorah Lieberman, Public Speaking in the Multicultural
Environment (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2000). Also see
Edward T. Hall, The Silent Language (Greenwich: Fawcett,
1959); and Edward T. Hall, The Hidden Dimension (Garden
City: Doubleday, 1966).
Chapter 7  Developing Your Speech
	 1.	 Mary Carmichael, “Speeches Strike a Similar Tone,” The
Boston Globe 8 June 2012.
	2.	Carmichael.
	 3.	 Roger Fringer, “Choosing a Speech Topic,” Student Speeches
Video II, 1st ed. By Allyn & Bacon. Copyright © 2003 by
Allyn and Bacon. Reprinted by permission of Pearson
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
	 4.	 Bruce Gronbeck, from his presidential address, delivered
at the annual conference of the Speech Communication
Association, November 1994.
	 5.	 Henry H. Sweets III, “Mark Twain’s Lecturing Career
Continuation—Part II,” The Fence Painter (Winter 2000–2001).
	 6.	 Alex F. Osborn, Applied Imagination (New York: Scribner’s,
1962).
	 7.	Monique Russo, “The ‘Starving Disease’ or Anorexia
Nervosa,” student speech, University of Miami, 1984.
	 8.	 Brian Sosnowchik, “The Cries of American Ailments,”
in Winning Orations 2000 (Mankato: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2000) 114.
	 9.	 Judith Humphrey, “Taking the Stage: How Women Can
Achieve a Leadership Presence,” Vital Speeches of the Day
(1 May 2001): 437.
	
10.	Adapted from Erin Gallagher, “Upholstered Furniture
Fires: Sitting in the Uneasy Chair,” in Winning Orations
2000 (Mankato: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2000)
99–101.
	11.	 “Shuttle Missions” NASA, 9 March 2011, 22 April 2011.
http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle	
/shuttlemissions/index.html.
	12.	 Adapted from Nicole Tremel, “The New Wasteland: Com-
puters,” Winning Orations 2000 (Mankato: Interstate Ora-
torical Association, 2000).
	13.	 Patrick Martin, “The Energy Cure That Kills: Hydraulic
Fracturing for Natural Gas,” in Winning Orations 2011
(Mankato: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2011) 147.
Chapter 8 
Gathering and Using Supporting
Material
	 1.	 “Types of Web Sites,” Xavier University Library, 2010.
	 2.	Elizabeth Kirk, “Practical Steps in Evaluating Internet
Resources.” 7 May 2001. 22 May 2001 <http://Milton.mse
.jhu.edu:8001/research/education/ractical.html>.
	 3.	 Charles Osgood, “On Civility in the Media,” Vital Speeches
of the Day (September 2011): 316–18.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 459 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
460
	 4.	 Michael Cunningham, quoted in Dinitia Smith, “In the
Age of the Overamplified, a Resurgence for the Humble
Lecture,” New York Times 17 March 2006: B1, B5.
	 5.	Sandra Zimmer, quoted in Vickie K. Sullivan, “Public
Speaking: The Secret Weapon in Career Development,”
USA Today 24–25 May 2005: 133.
	 6.	 Hillary Rodham Clinton, “Women’s Progress Is Human
Progress,” Vital Speeches of the Day (1 May 2010): 199–203.
	 7.	 Kevin Rudd, “The Apology to the Forgotten Australians,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (1 January 2010): 2–6.
	 8.	 Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, “Connecting the Next Billion: The
New Frontier of Upward Mobility,” Vital Speeches of the
Day (1 March 2010): 130–33.
	 9.	 Tunette Powell, “It’s Not the Addict, It’s the Drug: Rede-
fining America’s War on Drugs,” Winning Orations 2012
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2012) 102.
	10.	 Andrew B. Wilson, “How to Craft a Winning Speech,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (1 September 2005): 685–89.
	11.	 David Cameron, “I’m for a Referendum on British Mem-
bership in the EU,” Vital Speeches of the Day (February
2013): 34–35.
	12.	 Alexandria Wisner, “Lithium Cell Batteries: The Power
to Kill,” Winning Orations 2011 (Mankato, MN: Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2011) 30.
	13.	 Matthew Cossolotto, “An Urgent Call to Action for Study
Abroad Alumni to Help Reduce Our Global Awareness
Deficit,” Vital Speeches of the Day (December 2009): 564–68.
	14.	 Patrick Martin, “The Energy Cure That Kills: Hydraulic
Fracturing for Natural Gas,” Winning Orations 2012
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2012)
147.
	15.	 Nicole Platzar, “Rated ‘D’ for Deficiency: The Sunshine
Vitamin,” Winning Orations 2012 (Mankato, MN: Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2012) 71.
	16.	 James Stanfill, “Entomophagy: The Other Other White
Meat,” Winning Orations 2009 (Mankato, MN: Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2009) 24.
	
17.	Throbjørn Jagland, “May Good Government Win in
Europe,” Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2013): 52–54.
	
18.	Indra Nooyi, “Short-Term Demands Vs. Long-Term
Responsibilities,” Vital Speeches of the Day (1 June 2010):
246–50.
	19.	 Ivan Seidenberg, “How the Government Can Promote a
Healthy, Competitive Communications Industry,” Vital
Speeches of the Day (1 December 2009): 540–43.
	20.	 “Sorry, You’ve Got the Wrong Number,” New York Times 26
May 2001: A17.
	
21.	Michael Blastland and David Spiegelhalter, The Norm
Chronicles: Stories and Numbers about Danger (London: Profile
Books, 2013) 47.
	22.	 Daniel Hinderliter, “Collaborative Consumption,” Winning
Orations 2012 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Asso-
ciation, 2012) 140.
	23.	 A. Barry Rand, “Rebuilding the Middle Class: A Blueprint
for the Future,” Vital Speeches of the Day (March 2013):
72–76.
	24.	 Andie Malterud, “Dropping the Bomb on Water Fluori-
dation,” Winning Orations 2012 (Mankato, MN: Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2012) 151.
	25.	 Dena Craig, “Clearing the Air about Cigars,” Winning
Orations 1998 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Asso-
ciation, 1998) 13.
	
26.	Sergio Marchionne, “Navigating the New Automotive
Epoch,” Vital Speeches of the Day (1 March 2010): 134–37.
	27.	 Michael Kelley, “The New Catch-22: Unemployment
Discrimination,” Winning Orations 2012 (Mankato, MN:
Interstate Oratorical Association, 2012) 57.
Chapter 9  Organizing and Outlining Your Speech
	 1.	 Information in this example comes from National Insti-
tutes of Health, “Stem Cells: A Primer,” May 2000.
	 2.	 Adapted from John Kuehn, untitled speech, Winning Ora-
tions 1994 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
1994) 83–85.
	 3.	 Dennis Lloyd, “Instant Expert: A Brief History of iPod,”
iLounge 26 June 2004; “Apple iPod, History of an Icon,”
ipod games 20 June 2007.
	 4.	 Beth Survant, “Let There Be Light,” Winning Orations 2011
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2011) 53.
	 5.	 Sarah Perez, “YouTube Reaches 4 Billion Views per Day,”
techcrunch.com 23 January 2012; Glenn Chapman, “You-
Tube Serving Up Two Billion Videos Daily,” Google News
16 May 2010.
	 6.	 Philip Shenon, “A Showcase for Indian Artifacts,” New
York Times 29 August 2004: TR 3.
	 7.	Adapted from Vonda Ramey, “Can You Read This?”
Winning Orations 1985 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 1985) 32–35.
	 8.	 Adapted from Joseph Jones, “The Facts About For-Profit
Universities,” Winning Orations 2011 (Mankato, MN: Inter-
state Oratorical Association, 2011) 74.
	 9.	 Cyntha Starks, “How to Write a Speech,” Vital Speeches of
the Day (April 2010).
	10.	 The following information is adapted from Devorah A.
Lieberman, Public Speaking in the Multicultural Environ-
ment (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1994).
	 11.	 Martin Medhurst, “The Text(ure) of the World in Presiden-
tial Rhetoric,” Vital Speeches of the Day (June 2012).
	12.	 John Seffrin, “The Worst Pandemic in the History of the
World,” 1 April 2004 Copyright 2004 by the American
Cancer Society, Inc. Reprinted by permission of The
American Cancer Society, Inc. All rights reserved.
	
13.	Anastasia Danilyuk, “Alternatives to Imprisonment,”
Winning Orations 2011 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratori-
cal Association, 2011) 97.
	14.	 Nichole Olson, “Flying the Safer Skies,” Winning Orations 2000
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2000) 122.
	15.	 Adapted from “Student Dies in Beach Sand Pit: Experts
Warn of Suffocation Danger,” The Christian Science Monitor
24 August 2012.
	
16.	Robert Gore, untitled speech, Winning Orations 2012
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2012) 87.
	17.	 Molly A. Lovell, “Hotel Security: The Hidden Crisis,”
Winning Orations 1994 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 1994) 18.
	
18.	Neela Latey, “U.S. Customs Procedures: Danger to
Americans’ Health and Society,” Winning Orations 1986
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1986) 22.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 460 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes ﻿ 461
	19.	 Susan Stevens, “Teacher Shortage,” Winning Orations 1986
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1986) 27.
	20.	 Ben Crosby, “The New College Disease,” Winning Orations
2000 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
2000): 133.
	21.	 John O’Brien, quoted in Brent Filson, Executive Speeches
(New York: Wiley, 1994) 144–45.
	22.	 Charles Parnell, “Speechwriting: The Profession and the
Practice,” Vital Speeches of the Day (15 January 1990): 56.
	23.	 The sample outline in this chapter is adapted from Brianne
Geise, “Access in Not Enough: Requiring Counsel with
University Sale of the Morning-After Pill,” Texas State
University, 2013.
	24.	 Clive Thompson, “PowerPoint Makes You Dumb,” New
York Times Magazine 14 December 2003: 88.
Chapter 10  Introducing Your Speech
	 1.	 K. Phillip Taylor, “Speech Teachers’ Pet Peeves: Student
­
Behaviors That Public Instructors Find Annoying, Irritat-
ing, and Unwanted in Student Speeches,” Florida Commu-
nication Journal 33.2 (2005): 56.
	 2.	 Lauren Holstein, “Slavery in the Sunshine State,” Winning
Orations 2012 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Asso-
ciation, 2012) 34.
	 3.	 Sheena Holliday, “Uninvited Visitor,” Winning Orations
2003 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
2003) 84.
	 4.	 Edwin Pittock, “America’s Crisis in Aging,” Vital Speeches
of the Day (February 2004).
	 5.	 Charles W. Chestnut, Frederick Douglass. Electronic edi-
tion published by Academic Affairs Library, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2001.
	 6.	 Cadie Thompson, “Twitter CEO Dick Costolo Gives New
Grads Advice to Be ‘Bold’,” CNBC 6 May 2013.
	 7.	Jennifer Sweeney, “Racial Profiling,” Winning Orations
2000 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
2000).
	 8.	 Matt Miller, “A Situational Speech: Bispehnol A,” Winning
Orations 2009 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Asso-
ciation, 2009, editor Larry Schnoor).
	 9.	 Statistics from “Which Law School Graduates Have the Most
Debt?” U.S. News and World Report Best Law Schools, 2013.
	10.	 Terrika Scott, “Curing Crisis with Community,” Winning
Orations 1995 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Asso-
ciation, 1995) 11.
	11.	 Theresa Clinkenbeard, “The Loss of Childhood,” Winning
Orations 1984 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Asso-
ciation, 1984) 4.
	12.	 Thad Noyes, “Dishonest Death Care,” Winning Orations 1999
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1999) 73.
	13.	 Marvin Olasky, “Responding to Disaster,” Vital Speeches of
the Day (November 2006): 744.
	14.	 Joe Griffith, Speaker’s Library of Business Stories, Anecdotes,
and Humor (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990) 335.
	15.	 Douglas MacArthur, “Farewell to the Cadets,” address
delivered at West Point, 12 May 1962. Reprinted in Richard
L. Johannesen, R. R. Allen, and Will A. Linkugel, eds.,
­
Contemporary American Speeches, 7th ed. (Dubuque, IA:
Kendall/Hunt, 1992) 393.
	16.	 Jascha Hoffman, “Me Translate Funny One Day,” The New
York Times Book Review 21 October 2012: 31
	17.	 Muhtar Kent, “Are We Ready for Tomorrow, Today?” Vital
Speeches of the Day (March 2010): 117–21.
	18.	 Richard Propes, “Alone in the Dark,” Winning Orations
1985 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
1985) 22.
	19.	 Luis Proenza, “Relevance, Connectivity and Productiv-
ity,” Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2010): 89–92.
	20.	 Cynthia J. Starks. “How to Write a Speech,” Vital Speeches
of the Day (April 2010): 153–56.
	21.	 Adam Winegarden, “The After-Dinner Speech,” in Tasha
Van Horn, Lori Charron, and Michael Charron, eds., Allyn
& Bacon Video II User’s Guide, 2002.
	22.	 William G. Durden, “Just Do Science,” Vital Speeches of the
Day (March 2013): 67–71.
	23.	 Chris Miller, “Remember Both the Art and the Business
­
Involved in Collision Repair,” Vital Speeches of the Day
(May 2010): 203–13.
	24.	 Chris Christie, “The Adults Are in Charge,” Vital Speeches
of the Day (March 2013): 82–87.
	25.	 Student speech, University of Miami, 1981.
Chapter 11  Concluding Your Speech
	 1.	 Lou Gehrig, “Farewell Speech,” Lou Gehrig: The Official
WebSite,23June2007,www.lougehrig.com/about/speech
.htm.
	 2.	 Robert Lehrman, “Victory Speeches,” The New York Times
7 November 2012.
	 3.	 Noelle Stephens, “The WWW.CON of Higher Education,”
Winning Orations 1999 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratori-
cal Association, 1999) 12.
	 4.	 John Ryan, “Emissions Tampering: Get the Lead Out,”
Winning Orations 1985 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 1985) 63.
	 5.	 Melanie Loehwing, untitled speech, Winning Orations 2003
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2003)
23–24.
	 6.	 Richard Kelley, “Ready, Aim, Thrive: Strategies for 2007,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (December 2006): 763–67.
	7.	Bono, “Because We Can, We Must.” University of
Pennsylvania, Almanac Between Issues 19 May 2004. 1 July
2010.
	 8.	 Matt Miller, “A Situational Speech: Bisphenol A,” Winning
Orations 2009 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2009). Copyright 2009 by Interstate Oratorical
­
Association. Reprinted by permission.
	 9.	 James W. Robinson, “Create a Fireworks Finale,” Executive
Speeches (April 1989): 41–44.
	10.	 Tyler Kingkade, “Brian Williams’s Elon Commencement
Speech Included Heartwarming Message to His Son,” The
Huffington Post 28 May 2013.
Chapter 12 
Using Words Well: Speaker Language
and Style
	 1.	 “10 Hilarious Protest Signs,” Blognoscor 16 October 2010.
	2.	David Crystal, “Speaking of Writing and Writing of
­Speaking,” Longman Dictionaries: Express Yourself with Confi-
dence! (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2005).
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 461 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
462
	 3.	 Nemanja Savic, “Hope in the Voices of Africa,” speech
delivered at Wake Forest University, 14 May 2006. Window
on Wake Forest. 15 May 2006.
	4.	
Max Woodfin, “Three among Many Lives Jordan
Touched,” Austin American-Statesman 20 1996: A13.
	 5.	 Paul Roberts, “How to Say Nothing in Five Hundred
Words,” in William H. Roberts and Gregoire Turgeson,
eds., About Language (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986) 28.
	 6.	 George Orwell, “Politics and the English Language,” in
William H. Roberts and Gregoire Turgeson, eds., About
Language (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986) 282.
	 7.	 Erma Bombeck, “Missing Grammar Genes Is, Like, the
Problem,” Austin American-Statesman 3 March 1992.
	 8.	 Sik Ng and James J. Bradac, Power in Language: Verbal
Communication and Social Influence. Language and Language
Behaviors, Vol. 3 (1993). http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/
1993-98279-000
	 9.	 John Lister, quoted in “At the End of the Day, It Annoys,”
Associated Press, 24 March 2004.
	10.	 Shelley Matheson, “The Most Annoying Chichés Ever,”
The Scottish Sun 8 January 2010.
	11.	 William Safire, “Words at War,” New York Times Magazine
30 September 2001.
	12.	 John S. Seiter, Jarrod Larsen, and Jacey Skinner, “‘Handi­
capped’ or ‘Handicapable?’: The Effects of Language
about Persons with Disabilities on Perceptions of Source
Credibility and Persuasiveness,” Communication Reports
11:1 (1998): 21–31.
	13.	 Peggy Noonan, What I Saw at the Revolution (New York:
Random House, 1990) 71.
	14.	 Michael M. Klepper, I’d Rather Die Than Give a Speech (New
York: Carol Publishing Group, 1994) 45.
	15.	 We acknowledge the following source for several examples
used in our discussion of language style: William
Jordan, “Rhetorical Style,” Oral Communication Handbook
(Warrensburg: Central Missouri State U, 1971–1972) 32–34.
	16.	 Eric Stolhanske, “Advice from a Kid with a Wooden Leg,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (July 2012): 211–16.
	17.	 Scott Davis, “Class Begins Today,” Vital Speeches of the Day
(August 2011): 279–80.
	18.	 Samuel Hazo, “Poetry and Public Speech,” Vital Speeches of
the Day (1 April 2007): 685–89.
	19.	 Michiko Kakutani, “Struggling to Find Words for a Horror
Beyond Words,” New York Times 13 September 2001: E1.
	20.	 Franklin Roosevelt, inaugural address of 1933 (Washington,
DC: National Archives and Records Administration, 1988) 22.
	21.	 George F. Will, “‘Let Us . . .’? No, Give It a Rest,” Newsweek
22 January 2001: 64.
	
22.	John F. Kennedy, inaugural address, 20 January 1961,
in Bower Aly and Lucille F. Aly, eds., Speeches in English
(New York: Random House, 1968) 272.
	
23.	Barack Obama, “Can We Honestly Say We’re Doing
Enough?” Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2013): 34–35.
	24.	 Garrison Keillor, The Writer’s Almanac, 20 August 2012.
	25.	 Barack Obama, “Look at the World through Their Eyes,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (1 May 2013): 138–42.
	26.	 Roosevelt, inaugural address of 1933.
	27.	 William Faulkner, speech in acceptance of the Nobel Prize
for Literature, delivered 10 December 1950, in Houston
Peterson, ed., A Treasury of the World’s Great Speeches (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1965) 814–15.
	
28.	David Brooks, baccalaureate address at Sewanee: The
University of the South. Sewanee Today 11 May 2013.
	29.	 Roosevelt, inaugural address of 1933.
	30.	 Winston Churchill, address to the Congress of the United
States, delivered on 26 December 1941, in Bower Aly and
Lucille F. Aly, eds., Speeches in English (New York: Random
House, 1968) 233.
	 31.	 Barack Obama, inaugural address of 2013, washingtonpost
.com, 21 January 2013.
	32.	 Adapted from Jordan, Oral Communication Handbook, 34.
	33.	 Kennedy, inaugural address.
	34.	 “Reference to Rape Edited from Graduation Speech,”
Kansas City Star 5 June 1995: B3.
Chapter 13  Delivering Your Speech
	 1.	 William Shakespeare, Hamlet, 1601.
	 2.	 For an excellent discussion of the importance of speaker de-
livery according to both classical and contemporary rhetori-
cians, see J. Fredal, “The Language of Delivery and the Pres-
entation of Character: Rhetorical Action in Demosthenes’
‘Against Meidias,’” Rhetoric Review 20 (2001): 251–67.
	 3.	 James W. Gibson, John A. Kline, and Charles R. Gruner,
“A Reexamination of the First Course in Speech at U.S.
Colleges and Universities,” Speech Teacher 23 (September
1974): 206–14.
	 4.	 Steven A. Beebe and Thompson Biggers, “The Effect of
Speaker Delivery upon Listener Emotional Response,”
paper presented at the International Communication
Association meeting, May 1989.
	5.	Ray Birdwhistle, Kinesics and Context (Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania, 1970).
	 6.	 Judee K. Burgoon and Beth A. Le Poire, “Nonverbal Cues
and Interpersonal Judgments: Participant and Observer
Perceptions of Intimacy, Dominance, Composure, and For-
mality,” Communication Monographs 66 (1999): 105–24; Beth
A. Le Poire and Stephen M. Yoshimura, “The Effects of Expec-
tancies andActual Communication on NonverbalAdaptation
and Communication Outcomes: A Test of Interaction Adapta-
tion Theory,” Communication Monographs 66 (1999): 1–30.
	 7.	 Albert Mehrabian, Nonverbal Communication (Hawthorne:
Aldine, 1972).
	8.	D. Lapakko, “Three Cheers for Language: A Closer
Examination of a Widely Cited Study of Nonverbal
Communication,” Communication Education 46 (1997): 63–67.
	 9.	 Elaine Hatfield, J. T. Cacioppo, and R. L. Rapson, Emotional
Contagion (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994);
also see John T. Cacioppo, Gary G. Berntson, Jeff T. Larsen,
Kirsten M. Poehlmann, and Tiffany A. Ito, “The Psycho-
physiology of Emotion,” in Michael Lewis and Jeannette
M. Haviland-Jones, eds., Handbook of Emotions, 2nd ed.
(New York: Guilford Press, 2004) 173–91.
	10.	 Paul Ekman, Wallace V. Friesen, and K. R. Schere, “Body
Movement and Voice Pitch in Deception Interaction,”
­
Semiotica 16 (1976): 23–27; Mark Knapp, R. P. Hart,
and H. S. Dennis, “An Exploration of Deception as a
Communication Construct,” Human Communication Re-
search 1 (1974): 15–29.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 462 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes ﻿ 463
	11.	 Roger Ailes, You Are the Message (New York: Double-
day, 1989) 37–38; Gellis Communications, “Top Tips for
Preparing and Delivering a Manuscript Speech.” 4 November
2001. http://www.gellis.com/blog/top-tips-preparing-and-
delivering-manuscript-speech; David W. Richardson,
“Delivering a Manuscript Speech,” 2013. http://www
.richspeaking.com/articles/manuscript_speech.html.
	12.	 Austin-American Statesman 15 January 2007: A11.
	13.	 Eric J. Sundquist, King’s Dream (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 2009) 14.
	14.	 Sundquist, King’s Dream, 2.
	15.	 Cicero, De Oratore, vol. 4, translated by E. W. Sutton
­
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988).
	16.	 Steven A. Beebe, “Eye Contact: A Nonverbal Determinant
of Speaker Credibility,” Speech Teacher 23 (January 1974):
21–25;StevenA.Beebe,“EffectsofEyeContact,Postureand
Vocal Inflection upon Credibility and Comprehension,”
Australian Scan Journal of Nonverbal Communication 7–8
(1979–1980): 57–70; Martin Cobin, “Response to Eye
Contact,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 48 (1963): 415–19.
	17.	 Beebe, “Eye Contact,” 21–25.
	18.	 Khera Communications, “Business Tips for India,” More
Business, 2001. 8 June 2004 http://www.morebusness
.com/running_your_business/management/d930585271
.brc?highlightstring=Business+Tips+for+India.
	19.	 Brent Filson, Executive Speeches: Tips on How to Write and
Deliver Speeches from 51 CEOs (New York: Wiley, 1994).
	20.	 Albert Mehrabian, Silent Messages (Belmont: Wadsworth,
1971).
	21.	 For a comprehensive review of immediacy in an instruc-
tional context, see Virginia P. Richmond, Derek R. Lange,
and James C. McCroskey, “Teacher Immediacy and the
Teacher-Student Relationship,” in Timothy P. Mottet,
Virginia P. Richmond, and James C. McCroskey, Handbook
of Instructional Communication: Rhetorical and Relational
Perspectives (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2006) 167–93.
	22.	 See Virginia P. Richmond, Joan Gorham, and James C.
McCroskey,“TheRelationshipbetweenSelectedImmediacy
Behaviors and Cognitive Learning,” in M. McLaughlin,
ed., Communication Yearbook 10 (Beverly Hills: Sage, 1987)
574–90; Joan Gorham, “The Relationship between Verbal
Teacher Immediacy Behaviors and Student Learning,”
Communication Education 37 (1988): 40–53; Diane M. Chris-
tophel, “The Relationship among Teacher Immediacy
Behaviors, Student Motivation, and Learning,” Commu-
nication Education 39 (1990): 323–40; James C. McCroskey,
Virginia P. Richmond, Aino Sallinen, Joan M. Fayer, and
Robert A. Barraclough, “A Cross-Cultural and Multi-
BehavioralAnalysisoftheRelationshipbetweenNonverbal
Immediacy and Teacher Evaluation,” Communication
Education 44 (1995): 281–90; Timothy P. Mottet and Ste-
ven A. Beebe, “Relationships between Teacher Nonverbal
Immediacy, Student Emotional Response, and Perceived
Student Learning,” Communication Research Reports 19
(January 2002).
	23.	 Albert Mehrabian and M. Williams, “Nonverbal Concomi-
tants of Perceived and Intended Persuasiveness,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 13 (1969): 37–58.
	24.	 Michael J. Beatty, “Some Effects of Posture on Speaker Cred-
ibility,” library paper, University of Central Missouri, 1973.
	25.	 Paul Ekman, Wallace V. Friesen, and S. S. Tomkins, ­
“Facial
Affect Scoring Technique: AFirst Validity Study,” ­Semiotica
3 (1971).
	
26.	Paul Ekman and Wallace Friesen, Unmasking the Face
­
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1975); D. Keltner and
P. Ekman, “Facial Expression of Emotion,” in M. Lewis
and J. M. Haviland-Jones, eds., Handbook of Emotions (New
York: Gilford, 2000) 236–49; D. Keltner, P. Ekman, G. S.
Gonzaga, and J. Beer, “Facial Expression of Emotion,”
in R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer, and H. H. Goldsmith,
eds., Handbook of Affective Sciences (New York: Oxford
­
University Press, 2003) 415–32.
	27.	 Adapted from Lester Schilling, Voice and Diction for the
Speech Arts (San Marcos: Southwest Texas State University,
1979).
	28.	 Mary M. Gill, “Accent and Stereotypes: Their Effect on
Perceptions of Teachers and Lecture Comprehension,”
Journal of Applied Communication 22 (1994): 348–61.
	29.	 Kenneth K. Sereno and G. J. Hawkins, “The Effects of
Variations in Speakers’ Nonfluency upon Audience
Ratings ofAttitude Toward the Speech Topic and Speakers’
Credibility,” Speech Monographs 34 (1967): 58–74; Gerald
R. Miller and M. A. Hewgill, “The Effect of Variations in
Nonfluency on Audience Ratings of Source Credibility,”
Quarterly Journal of Speech 50 (1964): 36–44; Mehrabian
and Williams, “Nonverbal Concomitants of Perceived and
Intended Persuasiveness.”
	30.	 These suggestions were made by Jo Sprague and Douglas
Stuart, The Speaker’s Handbook (Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1992) 331 and were based on research
by Patricia A. Porter, Margaret Grant, and Mary Draper,
Communicating Effectively in English: Oral Communication
for Non-Native Speakers (Belmont: Wadsworth, 1985).
	31.	 James W. Neuliep, Intercultural Communication: A Contex-
tual Approach (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2000) 247.
	32.	 Stephen Lucas, The Art of Public Speaking (New York:
Random House, 1986) 231.
	33.	 Research cited by Leo Fletcher, How to Design and Deliver
Speeches (New York: Addison Wesley Longman, 2001) 73.
	34.	 “Comment,” The New Yorker 1 March 1993.
	35.	 John S. Seiter and Andrea Sandry, “Pierced for Success?:
The Effects of Ear and Nose Piercing on Perceptions of Job
Candidates’ Credibility, Attractiveness, and Hirability,”
Communication Research Reports 20.4 (2003): 287–98.
	36.	 For an excellent review of the effects of immediacy in the
classroom, see Mehrabian, Silent Messages; also see James
C. McCroskey, Aino Sallinen, Joan M. Fayer, Virginia
P. Richmond, and Robert A. Barraclough, “Nonverbal
Immediacy and Cognitive Learning: A Cross-Cultural In-
vestigation,” Communication Education 45 (1996): 200–11.
	37.	 Larry A. Samovar and Richard E. Porter, Communication
between Cultures (Stamford: Thomson Learning, 2001) 166.
	
38.	William B. Gudykunst, Bridging Differences: Effective
Intergroup Communication (Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1998) 12.
	39.	 Kent E. Menzel and Lori J. Carrell, “The Relationship
betweenPreparationandPerformanceinPublicSpeaking,”
Communication Education 43 (1994): 17–26; Tony E. Smith
and Ann Bainbridge Frymier, “Get ‘Real’: Does Practicing
Speeches Before an Audience Improve Performance?”
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 463 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
464
Communication Quarterly 54.1 (February 2006): 111–25;
Judy C. Pearson, Jeffrey T. Child, and David H. Kahl,
Jr., “Preparation Meeting Opportunity: How Do College
Students Prepare for Pubic Speeches?” Communication
Quarterly 54.3 (August 2006): 351–66.
	40.	 Filson, Executive Speeches.
	41.	 Filson, Executive Speeches.
Chapter 14 
Designing and Using Presentation
Aids
	 1.	 Emil Bohn and David Jabusch, “The Effect of Four Methods
of Instruction on the Use of Visual Aids in Speeches,”
Western Journal of Speech Communication 46 (Summer 1982):
253–65.
	 2.	 J. S. Wilentz, The Senses of Man (New York: Crowell, 1968).
	 3.	 Michael E. Patterson, Donald F. Dansereau, and Dianna
Newbern, “Effects of Communication Aids and Strategies
on Cooperative Teaching,” Journal of Educational Psychol-
ogy 84 (1992): 453–61.
	 4.	Louise Rehling, “Teaching in a High-Tech Conference
Room: Academic Adaptations and Workplace Simula-
tions,” Journal of Business and Technical Communication 19.1
(January 2005): 98–113.
	 5.	 Richard E. Mayer and Valerie K. Sims, “For Whom Is a
Picture Worth a Thousand Words?: Extensions of a Dual-
Coding Theory of Multimedia Learning,” Journal of Educa-
tional Psychology 86 (1994): 389–401.
	 6.	 Brent Filson, Executive Speeches: Tips on How to Write and
Deliver Speeches from 51 CEOs (New York: Wiley, 1994) 212.
	 7.	 Dale Cyphert, “The Problem of PowerPoint: Visual Aid
or Visual Rhetoric?” Business Communication Quarterly
(March 2004): 80–84.
	 8.	 Andrew Wilson, “In Defense of Rhetoric,” Toastmaster 70.2
(February 2004): 8–11.
	 9.	 Roxanne Parrott, Kami Silk, Kelly Dorgan, Celeste Condit,
and Tina Harris, “Risk Comprehension and Judgments
of Statistical Evidentiary Appeals: When a Picture Is Not
Worth a Thousand Words,” Human Communication Research
31 (July 2005): 423–52.
	10.	 We acknowledge Dan Cavanaugh’s excellent supplement
Preparing Visual Aids for Presentation (Boston: Allyn &
­
Bacon/Longman, 2001) as a source for many of our tips
and suggestions.
	11.	 Rebecca B. Worley and Marilyn A. Dyrud, “Presentations
and the PowerPoint Problem,” Business Communication
Quarterly 67 (March 2004): 78–80.
	12.	 For a good discussion of how to develop and use Power-
Point visuals, see Jerry Weissman, Presenting to Win: The
Art of Telling Your Story (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Financial
Times/Prentice Hall, 2003).
	13.	 We thank Stan Crowley, a student at Texas State University,
for his permission to use his speech outline.
Chapter 15  Speaking to Inform
	 1.	 John R. Johnson and Nancy Szczupakiewicz, “The Public
Speaking Course: Is It Preparing Students with Work-
Related Public Speaking Skills?” Communication Education
36 (April 1987): 131–37.
	 2.	 Pamela J. Hinds, “The Curse of Expertise: The Effects of
Expertise and Debiasing Methods on Predicting Novice
Performance,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied
5 (1999): 205–21. Research summarized in Chip Heath and
Dan Heath, Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others
Die (New York: Random House, 2007) 19–21.
	3.	Joseph L. Chesebro, “Effects of Teacher Clarity and
­
Nonverbal Immediacy on Student Learning, Receiver
Apprehension, and Affect,” Communication Education 52
(April 2003): 135–47.
	 4.	 Malcolm Knowles, The Adult Learner: A Neglected Species,
3rd ed. (Houston: Gulf Publishing, 1990).
	 5.	 Stephen A. Beebe, Timothy P. Mottet, and K. David Roach,
Training and Development: Communicating for Success
­
(Boston: Pearson, 2013).
	 6.	 Katherine E. Rowan, “A New Pedagogy for Explanatory
Public Speaking: WhyArrangement Should Not Substitute
for Invention,” Communication Education 44 (1995): 236–50.
	 7.	 Philip Yancy, Prayer: Does It Make Any Difference? (Grand
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2006) 20.
	 8.	 Michael A. Boerger and Tracy B. Henley, “The Use of
Analogy in Giving Instructions,” Psychological Record 49
(1999): 193–209.
	 9.	 Heath and Heath, Made to Stick, 63–64.
	10.	 Marcie Groover, “Learning to Communicate: The Importance
of Speech Education in Public Schools,” Winning Orations
1984 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
1984) 7.
	11.	 As cited in Eleanor Doan, The New Speaker’s Sourcebook
(Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1968).
	
12.	C. S. Lewis, “On Stories,” Essays Presented to Charles
­Williams, C. S. Lewis, ed. (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1947); also see Walter R. Fisher, Communication as
Narration: Toward a Philosophy of Reason, Value, and Action
(Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1987).
	13.	 Christopher Booker, The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell
­Stories (London: Continuum, 2004). The theory that all
­
stories are about “finding home” is from Steven A. Beebe,
C. S. Lewis: Chronicles of a Master Communicator (San Marcos,
TX: Texas State University, 2013).
	14.	 Heath and Heath, Made to Stick.
	 15.	 Roger Fringer, “Choosing a Speech Topic,” Student Speeches
Video, 1st ed. (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2003).
	16.	 See Bruce W. A. Whittlesea and Lisa D. Williams, “The
Discrepancy-Attribution Hypothesis II: Expectation, Un-
certainty, Surprise, and Feelings of Familiarity,” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2 (2001): 14–33; also see Suzanne Hidi, “Interest and Its
Contribution as a Mental Resource for Learning,” Review
of Educational Research 60 (1990): 549–71; Mark Sadoski,
­
Ernest T. Goetz, and Maximo Rodriguez, “Engaging Texts:
Effects of Concreteness of Comprehensibility, Interest, and
Recall in Four Text Types,” Journal of Educational Psychology
92 (2000): 85–95.
	17.	 Heath and Heath, Made to Stick, 51–52.
	
18.	George Miller, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or
­Minus Two,” Psychological Review 63 (1956): 81–97.
	19.	 D. K. Cruickshank and J. J. Kennedy, “Teacher Clarity,”
Teaching & Teacher Education 2 (1986): 43–67.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 464 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes ﻿ 465
Chapter 16 
Understanding Principles
of Persuasive Speaking
	 1.	 Martin Fishbein and I. Ajzen, Belief, Attitude, Intention, and
Behavior: An Introduction to Theory and Research (Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1975).
	2.	Aristotle, On Rhetoric, translated by George A. Kennedy
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1991) 14.
	 3.	For a discussion of motivation in social settings, see
­
Douglas T. Kenrick, Steven L. Neuberg, and Robert B.
Cialdini, Social Psychology: Unraveling the Mystery (Boston:
Allyn & Bacon, 2002).
	 4.	 For a discussion of the elaboration likelihood model, see
R. Petty and D. Wegener, “The Elaboration Likelihood
Model: Current Status and Controversies,” in S. Chaiken
and Y. Trope, eds., Dual Process Theories in Social Psychology
(New York: Guilford, 1999) 41–72; also see R. Petty and
J. T. Cacioppo, Communication and Persuasion: Central and
Peripheral Routes to Attitude Change (New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1986).
	 5.	 Leon Festinger, A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Evanston,
IL: Row, Peterson, 1957).
	 6.	 For additional discussion, see Wayne C. Minnick, The Art
of Persuasion (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967).
	 7.	 Abraham H. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,”
in Motivation and Personality (New York: Harper & Row,
1954), Chapter 5.
	 8.	 John Ryan, “Emissions Tampering: Get the Lead Out,”
Winning Orations 1985 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 1985) 50.
	 9.	 For a discussion of fear appeal research, see Irving L.
Janis and Seymour Feshback, “Effects of Fear Arousing
­Communications,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychol-
ogy 48 (January 1953): 78–92; Frederick A. Powell and
­
Gerald R. Miller, “Social Approval and Disapproval Cues
in Anxiety-Arousing Situations,” Speech Monographs 34
(June 1967): 152–59; Kenneth L. Higbee, “Fifteen Years
of Fear Arousal: Research on Threat Appeals, 1953–68,”
­
Psychological Bulletin 72 (December 1969): 426–44.
	
10.	Paul A. Mongeau, “Another Look at Fear-Arousing
­
Persuasive Appeals,” in Mike Allen and Raymond W.
Preiss, eds., Persuasion: Advances Through Meta-Analysis
(Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 1998) 65.
	
11.	K. Witte, “Putting the Fear Back into Fear Appeals:
The Extended Parallel Process Model,” Communication
­Monographs 59 (1992): 329–47.
	12.	 See discussions in Myron W. Lustig and Jolene Koester,
Intercultural Competence: Interpersonal Communication
across Cultures (Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2009) 347; Larry
A. ­
Samovar and Richard E. Porter, Communication between
Cultures (Stamford: Wadsworth and Thomson Learning,
2010) 29.
	13.	 C. W. Sherif, M. Sherif, and R. E. Nebergall, Attitudes and
Attitude Change: The Social Judgment-Involvement Approach
(Philadelphia: Saunders, 1965).
Chapter 17  Using Persuasive Strategies
	 1.	 Donald C. Bryant, “Rhetoric: Its Functions and Its Scope,”
Quarterly Journal of Speech 39 (December 1953): 26.
	 2.	 J. C. Reinard, “The Empirical Study of the Persuasive
­
Effects of Evidence: The Status after Fifty Years of
­Research,” Human Communication Research 15 (1988): 3–59.
	 3.	 James C. McCroskey and R. S. Rehrley, “The Effects of
Disorganization and Nonfluency on Attitude Change and
Source Credibility,” Speech Monographs 36 (1969): 13–21.
	 4.	 For an excellent meta-analysis of forty-nine studies exam-
ining the influence of delivery variables and persuasion,
see Chris Segrin, “The Effects of Nonverbal Behavior on
Outcomes of Compliance Gaining Attempts,” Communica-
tion Studies 44 (1993): 169–87.
	 5.	Judee K. Burgoon, T. Birk, and M. Pfau, “Nonverbal
­
Behaviors, Persuasion, and Credibility,” Human Communi-
cation Research 17 (1990): 140–69.
	 6.	 Segrin, “The Effects of Nonverbal Behavior on Outcomes
of Compliance Gaining Attempts.”
	 7.	 Robin L. Nabi, Emily Moyer-Guse, and Sahara Byrne, “All
Joking Aside: A Serious Investigation into the Persuasive
Effect of Funny Social Issue Messages,” Communication
Monographs 74 (March 2007): 29–54.
	 8.	 For a discussion of the perceived link between induc-
tive and deductive reasoning, see Evan Heit and Caren
M. Rotello, “Relations Between Inductive and Deductive
Reasoning,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 36 (2010):
805–12.
	 9.	 For an excellent discussion of the influence of culture on
public speaking, see Devorah A. Lieberman, Public Speak-
ing in the Multicultural Environment (Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice Hall, 1994) 10.
	10.	 Devorah Lieberman and G. Fisher, “International Nego-
tiation,” in Larry A. Samovar and Richard E. Porter, eds.,
­
Intercultural Communication: A Reader (Belmont: Wadsworth,
1991) 193–200.
	11.	 Lieberman and Fisher, “International Negotiation.”
	 12.	 Jeffrey E. Jamison, “Alkaline Batteries: Powering Electronics
and Polluting the Environment,” Winning Orations 1991
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1991) 43.
	13.	 H. B. Brosius and A. Bathelt, “The Utility of Exemplars in
Persuasive Communications,” Communication Research 21
(1994): 48–78.
	14.	 Lisa L. Massi-Lindsey and Kimo Ah Yun, “Examining the
Persuasive Effect of Statistical Messages” ­
Communication
Studies 54 (Fall 2003): 306–21; D. C. Kazoleas, “A Compari-
son of the Persuasive Effectiveness of Qualitative versus
Quantitative Evidence: A Test of Explanatory ­
Hypotheses,”
Communication Quarterly 41 (1993): 40–50; also see M. ­
Allen
and R. W. Preiss, “Comparing the Persuasiveness of Nar-
rative and Statistical Evidence Using Meta-Analysis,” Com-
munication Research Reports (1997): 125–31.
	15.	 Franklin J. Boster, Kenzie A. Cameron, Shelly Campo,
Wen-Ying Liu, Janet K. Lillie, Esther M. Baker, and Kimo
Ah Yun, “The Persuasive Effects of Statistical Evidence in
the Presence of Exemplars,” Communication Studies 51(Fall
2000): 296–306; also see E. J. Baesler and Judee K. Burgoon,
“The Temporal Effects of Story and Statistical Evidence
on Belief Change,” Communication Research 21 (1994):
582–602.
	16.	 Reinard, “The Empirical Study of the Persuasive Effects of
Evidence,” 37–38.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 465 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
466
	
17.	William L. Benoit and I. A. Kennedy, “On Reluctant
­Testimony,” Communication Quarterly 47 (1999): 376–87.
Although this study raises questions about whether reluc-
tant testimony is persuasive, reluctant testimony as well
as neutral testimony is better than testimony perceived to
be obviously biased.
	18.	 E. J. Baesler, “Persuasive Effects of Story and Statistical
Evidence,” Argumentation and Advocacy 33 (1997): 170–75.
	19.	 Myron W. Lustig and Jolene Koester, Intellectual Compe-
tence: Interpersonal Communication Across Cultures (Boston:
Allyn & Bacon, 2009).
	 20.	 K.Ah Yun and L. L. Massi, “The Differential Impact of Race
in the Effectiveness of Narrative versus Statistical Appeals
to Persuade Individuals to Sign an Organ ­
Donor Card,”
paper presented at the meeting of the Western States
Communications Association, Sacramento, CA; cited by
Massi-Lindsey and Ah Yun, “Examining the ­
Persuasive
Effect of Statistical Messages.”
	21.	 Lustig and Koester, Intercultural Competence, 241.
	22.	 Jamie Frater, “Top 10 Great Historic Speeches,” http://
listverse.com/2008/06/01/top-10-great-historic-speeches/
accessed June 14, 2013.
	
23.	Albert Mehrabian and J. A. Russell, An Approach to
­Environmental Psychology (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1974);
T. Biggers and B. Pryor, “Attitude Change as a Function
of Emotion-Eliciting Qualities,” Personality and Social
­Psychology Bulletin 8 (1982): 94–99; Steven A. Beebe and T.
­
Biggers, “Emotion-Eliciting Qualities of Speech Delivery
and Their Effect on Credibility and Comprehension,”
­
paper ­
presented at the annual meeting of the International
Communication Association, New Orleans, May 1989.
	24.	 Donald Dean Morely and Kim B. Walker, “The Role of
Importance, Novelty, and Plausibility in Producing Belief
Change,” Communication Monographs 54 (1987): 436–42;
also see Chip Heath and Dan Heath, Made to Stick: Why
Some Ideas Survive and Others Die (New York: Random
House, 2007) 63–97.
	25.	 John W. Bowers and Michael M. Osborn, “Attitudinal
­
Effects of Selected Types of Concluding Metaphors in
­Persuasive Speeches,” Speech Monographs 33 (1966):
147–55; James C. McCroskey and W. H. Combs, “The
Effects of the Use of Analogy on Attitude Change and
Source ­Credibility,” Journal of Communication 19 (1969):
333–39; N. L. Reinsch, “An Investigation of the Effects of
the ­
Metaphor and Simile in Persuasive Discourse,” Speech
Monographs 38 (1971): 142–45.
	26.	 Pradeep Sopory and James Price Dillard, “The Persuasive
Effects of Metaphor: A Meta-Analysis,” Human Communi-
cation Research 28 (July 2002): 382–419.
	27.	 See Irving Janis and S. Feshback, “Effects of Fear-Arousing
Communication,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology
48 (1953): 78–92; Fredric A. Powell, “The Effects of Anxiety-
Arousing Message When Related to Personal, Familial, and
Impersonal Referents,” Speech Monographs 32 (1965): 102–6.
	28.	 Donald C. Bryant, “Rhetoric: Its Functions and Its Scope,”
Quarterly Journal of Speech 39 (December 1953): 26.
	29.	 William L. Benoit, “Forewarning and Persuasion,” in Mike
Allen and Raymond W. Preiss, eds., Persuasion: Advances
Through Meta-Analysis (Cresskill: Hampton Press, 1998)
139–54.
	30.	 Karmen Kirtley, “Grave Matter: The High Cost of Living,”
Winning Orations 1997 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 1997).
	31.	 Benoit, “Forewarning and Persuasion.”
	
32.	Mike Allen, “Comparing the Persuasive Effectiveness
of One- and Two-Sided Messages,” in Mike Allen and
Raymond W. Preiss, eds., Persuasion: Advances Through
Meta-Analysis (Cresskill: Hampton Press, 1998) 87–98.
	33.	 Katherine E. Rowan, “A New Pedagogy for Explanatory
Public Speaking: WhyArrangement Should Not Substitute
for Invention,” Communication Education 44 (1995): 236–50.
	
34.	Carl I. Hovland, Arthur A. Lunsdaine, and Fred D.
Sheffield, “The Effects of Presenting ‘One Side’ versus
‘Both Sides’ in Changing Opinions on a Controversial
Subject,” in Experiments on Mass Communication (Princeton:
Princeton University, 1949). Also see Arthur Lunsdaine
and Irving Janis, “Resistance to ‘Counter-Propaganda’
ProducedbyaOne-SidedversusaTwo-Sided‘Propaganda’
Presentation,” Public Opinion Quarterly (1953): 311–18.
	35.	 N. Miller and Donald T. Campbell, “Recency and Primacy
in Persuasion as a Function of the Timing of Speeches and
Measurements,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology
59 (1959): 1–9; Adrian Furnham, “The Robustness of the
Recency Effect: Studies Using Legal Evidence,” ­
Journal
of General Psychology 113 (1986): 351–57; R. Rosnow,
­
“Whatever Happened to the ‘Law of Primacy’?” Journal of
­Communication 16 (1966): 10–31.
	36.	 Robert B. Ricco, “Analyzing the Roles of Challenge and
Defense in Argumentation,” Argumentation and Advocacy
39 (Summer 2002): 1–22.
	37.	 Colter Ray, “You Are What You Eat: Why You Should Eat
Grass-Fed Organic Beef,” Texas State University student
speech, 2013.
	38.	 Douglas Ehninger, Bruce E. Gronbeck, Ray E. McKerrow,
and Alan H. Monroe, Principles and Types of Speech
Communication (Glenview: Scott, Foresman, 1986) 15.
Chapter 18 
Speaking for Special Occasions and
Purposes
	 1.	 Robert Watts and Michael Sheridan, “Blair Is World’s Best
Paid Speaker,” London Times 5 April 2009.
	 2.	 Jason Buckland, “Highest-Paid Public Speakers,” Canada
msnmoney 20 October 2011.
	 3.	 “10 Highest-Paid Public Speakers in the World,”
www.onlineuniversities.com 27 April 2010.
	 4.	 “10 Highest-Paid Public Speakers in the World.”
	5.	“Clinton’s Speaking Fees Nearly Total $40 Million,”
­
Huffington Post 23 February 2007. 27 June 2007.
	 6.	 Leslie Wayne, “In World Where Talk Doesn’t Come Cheap,
Former Officials Are Finding Lucrative Careers,” New York
Times 10 March 2004: A14.
	 7.	 Roger E. Flax, “A Manner of Speaking,” Ambassador (May–
June 1991): 37.
	8.	Slainte! Toasts, Blessings, and Sayings. March 1998.
	 9.	 Sarah Husberg, “A Wedding Toast,” in Tasha Van Horn,
Lori Charron, and Michael Charron, eds., Allyn & Bacon
Video II User’s Guide, 2002.
	10.	 Jeff Brooks, Wedding Toasts. March 1998. 29 June 1998.
	
11.	Everett M. Dirksen, “Nominating Speech for Barry
Goldwater” (July 15, 1964), in James R. Andrews and
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 466 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes ﻿ 467
David Zarefsky, eds., Contemporary American Voices (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1965) 815.
	
12.	Erma Bombeck, “Abbreviated Thank-You’s Allow Us
More Time to Study Danson’s Head,” Austin American-
Statesman 22 June 1993: F3.
	
13.	Cindy Pearlman, “Oscar Speeches: Statues in Their
Hands, Feet in Their Mouths,” Austin American-Statesman
24 March 1997: E8.
	
14.	“Exclusive: The Complete Text of Bruce Springsteen’s
SXSW Keynote Address,” Rolling Stone Music, 8 March
2012.
	
15.	Barbara Jordan, “Change: From What to What?” Vital
Speeches of the Day (15 August 1992): 651.
	 16.	 DavidAbel, “CommencementAddresses Leave­Audiences
Lost,” Boston Globe 5 June 2000: B4.
	17.	 Richard Pérez-Peña, “In Looser Tone, Speakers Urge Grad-
uates to Take Risks and Be Engaged,” The New York Times
15 June 2013.
	18.	 “Mike Bloomberg’s Remarks from Standford University’s
122nd Commencement,” mikebloomberg.com, 16 June 2013.
	19.	 Sylvia Earle, “The Best Time in History for Whatever
You’re Going to Do Next.” Vital Speeches of the Day (August
2012): 254–58.
	20.	 Abel, “Commencement Addresses Leave Audiences Lost,”
B4.
	21.	 Bill Clinton, speech at Pointe du Hoc, France (June 1994),
as quoted in David Shribman, “President, a Child of World
War II, Thanks a Generation,” Boston Globe 7 June 1994: 1.
	22.	 Cyrus Copeland, “Death, Be Not Ponderous,” New York
Times 31 October 2004.
	23.	 Veronique Pozner, “Momma Loves You, Little Man,” Vital
Speeches of the Day (February 2013): 36.
	
24.	John T. Masterson, Jr., eulogy for Betty Stalvey, New
Braunfels, TX, 26 March 2005.
	25. Dave Barry, “Speak! Speak!” Austin American-Statesman
2 June 1991: C4.
	26.	 Sarah Booth Connors, “State Dinners Offer Speech as First
Course,” Austin-American Statesman 10 November 1989.
	27.	 Debi Martin, “Laugh Lines,” Austin American-Statesman 20
May 1988: D1.
	28.	 Jon Macks, How to Be Funny (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2003).
	29.	 Matt Hughes, “Tricks of the Speechwriter’s Trade,” Man-
agement Review 79 (November 1990): 56–58.
	 30.	 Michael Koresky, “Prognosis: Dire, Michael Moore’s ‘Sicko’,”
indieWIRE, 22 June 2007.
	31.	 John C. Meyer, “Humor as a Double-Edged Sword: Four
Functions of Humor in Communication,” Communication
Theory 10 (August 2000): 311.
	
32.	Joe Queenan, “How to Tell a Joke,” Reader’s Digest
­
(September 2003): 73.
	
33.	Michael Blastland and David Spiegelhalter, The Norm
Chronicles: Stories and Numbers about Danger (London:
­
Profile Books, 2013) 42.
	
34.	Alison White, “Writing a Humorous Speech,” www
.bizinternet.com June 2004.
	
35.	Mark Twain, “The Alphabet and Simplified Spelling,”
address at the dedication of the New York Engineers’
Club, 9 December 1907. Mark Twain’s Speeches; with an
Introduction by William Dean Howells.
	36.	 Bill Gates, 2007 Harvard commencement address, Harvard
University Gazette Online 7 June 2007.
	37.	 Chris O’Keefe, untitled speech, in John K. Boaz and James
Brey, eds., 1987 Championship Debates and Speeches (Speech
Communication Association and American Forensic Asso-
ciation, 1987) 99.
	38.	 Owen H. Lynch, “Humorous Communication: Finding a
Place for Humor in Communication Research,” Communi-
cation Theory 12.4 (November 2002): 423–45.
	39.	 Mirren ‘Too Busy’ to Meet Queen,” BBC News 10 May
2007.
	40.	 Susan Wallace, “Seriously, How Do I Write a Humor-
ous Speech?” as reported by Mike Dicerbo, Leadership in
Action 1 November 2000.
Appendix A  Speaking in Small Groups
	 1.	 Group communication principles presented in this chapter
are adapted from Steven A. Beebe and John T. Masterson,
Communicating in Small Groups: Principles and Practices,
11th ed. (Boston: Pearson, 2015).
	 2.	 Our definition of team is based on a discussion in Beebe
and Masterson, Communicating in Small Groups; and
in Steven A. Beebe, Susan J. Beebe, and Diana K. Ivy,
­
Communication Principles for a Lifetime (Boston: Pearson,
2013): 240–41; J. R. Katzenback and D. K. Smith, The
Wisdom of Teams: Creating the High-Performance Organization
(New York: Harper Business, 1993); M. Schrage, No More
Teams! Mastering the Dynamics of Creative Collaboration
(New York: Currency Doubleday, 1995); D. D. Chrislip and
C. E. Larson, Collaborative Leadership (San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass, 1994); C. Klein, D. Diaz Granados, E. Salas,
H. Le, C. S. Burke, R. Lyons, and G. F. Goodwin, “Does
Team Building Work?” Small Group Research 40 no. 2 (2009):
181–222; A. N. Pieterse, D. van Knippenberg, and W. P. van
Ginkel, “Diversity in Goal Orientation, Team Reflexivity,
and Team Performance,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes 114 (2011): 153–64.
	 3.	 For discussions of the advantages and disadvantages of
working in small groups, see Norman R. F. Maier, “Assets
and Liabilities in Group Problem Solving: The Need for
an Integrative Function,” Psychological Review 74 (1967):
239–49; Michael Argyle, Cooperation: The Basis of Sociabil-
ity (London: Routledge, 1991); J. Surowiecki, The Wisdom
of Crowds (New York: Anchor, 2005); P. R. Laughlin, E. C.
Hatch, J. Silver, and L. Boh, “Groups Perform Better Than
the Best Individuals on Letters-to-Numbers Problems:
Effects on Group Size,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 90 (2006): 644–51; J. S. Mueller, “Why Indi-
viduals in Larger Teams Perform Worse,” Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 117 (2012): 111–24:
B. R. Staats, K. L. Milkman, and C. R. Fox, “The Team
Scaling Fallacy: Underestimating the Declining Efficiency
of Larger Teams,” Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes 118 (2012): 132–42; B. M. Waller, L. Hope,
N. Burrowes, and E. R. Morrison, “Twelve (Not So) Angry
Men: Managing Conversational Group Size Increases
Perceived Contribution by Decision Makers,” Group Proc­
esses & Intergroup Relations 14, no. 6 (2011): 835–43.
	 4.	 Maier, “Assets and Liabilities in Group Problem Solving”;
Argyle, Cooperation.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 467 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Notes
﻿
468
	 5.	 John Dewey, How We Think (Boston: Heath, 1910).
	 6.	 P. L. McLeod, “Effects of Anonymity and Social Com-
parison of Rewards on Computer-Mediated Group Brain-
storming,” Small Group Research 42 (2011): 475–503; H.
Barki, “Small Group Brainstorming and Idea Quality: Is
Electronic Brainstorming the Most Effective Approach?”
Small Group Research 32 (2001): 158–205; B. A. Nijstad, W.
Stroebe, and H. F. M. Lodewijkx, “Cognitive Stimulation
and Interference in Groups: Exposure Effects in an Idea
Generation Task,” Journal of Experimental Social ­
Psychology
38 (2002): 535–44; E. F. Rietzchel, B. A. Jijstad, and W.
Stroebe, “Productivity Is Not Enough: A Comparison of
Interactive and Nominal Brainstorming Groups on Idea
Generation and Selection,” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 42 (2006): 244–51; also see P. B. Paulus, M. T.
Dzindolet, H. Coskun, and V. K. Putman, “Social and
Cognitive Influences in Group Brainstorming: Predicting
Production Gains and Losses,” European Review of Social
Psychology 12 (2002): 299–326.
	 7.	 K. L. Dugosh, P. B. Paulus, E. J. Roand, and H. C. Yang,
“Cognitive Stimulation in Brainstorming,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 79 (2000): 722–35.
	 8.	 R. Y. Hirokawa and A. J. Salazar, “Task-Group Commu-
nication and Decision-Making Performance,” in L. Frey,
ed., The Handbook of Group Communication Theory and
Research (Thousand Oaks: Sage, 1999) 167–91; D. Gouran
and R. Y. Hirokawa, “Functional Theory and Communi-
cation in Decision-Making and Problem-Solving Groups:
An Expanded View,” in R. Y. Hirokawa and M. S. Poole,
eds., Communication and Group Decision Making (Thousand
Oaks: Sage, 1996) 55–80.
	 9.	 C. A. VanLear and E. A. Mabry, “Testing Contrasting In-
teraction Models for Discriminating between Consensual
and Dissentient Decision-Making Groups,” Small Group
Research 30 (1999): 29–58; also see T. J. Saine and D. G.
Bock, “A Comparison of the Distributional and Sequential
Structures of Interaction in High and Low Consensus
Groups,” Central States Speech Journal 24 (1973): 125–39.
	10.	 Randy Y. Hirokawa and Roger Pace, “A Descriptive Inves-
tigation of the Possible Communication-Based Reasons
for Effective and Ineffective Group Decision Making,”
Communication Monographs 50 (December 1983): 363–79.
	
11.	
Randy Y. Hirokawa, “Group Communication and
­
Problem-Solving Effectiveness: An Investigation of Group
Phases,” Human Communication Research 9 (Summer 1983):
291–305.
	
12.	Dennis S. Gouran, “Variables Related to Consensus
in Group Discussion of Question of Policy,” Speech
­Monographs 36 (August 1969): 385–91.
	13.	 For a summary of research about conflict management
in small groups, see S. M. Farmer and J. Roth, “Conflict-­
Handling Behavior in Work Groups: Effects of Group
Structure, Decision Processes, and Time,” Small Group
­Research 29 (1998): 669–713; also see Beebe and Masterson,
Communicating in Small Groups; J. Sell, M. J. Lovaglia, E. A.
Mannix, C. D. Samuelson, and R. K. Wilson, “Investigating
Conflict, Power, and Status Within and Among Groups,”
Small Group Research 30 (1999): 44–72; K. J. Behfar, E. A.
Mannix, R. S. Peterson, and W. M. Trochim, “Conflict in
Small Groups: The Meaning and Consequences of ­
Process
Conflict,” Small Group Research 42 (2011): 127–76; L. L.
Greer, H. M. Caruso, and K. A. Jehn, “The Bigger They
Are, the Harder They Fall: Linking Team Power, Team
Conflict, and Performance,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Process 116 (2011): 166–68.
	14.	 Ralph White and Ronald Lippitt, “Leader Behavior and
Member Reaction in Three ‘Social Climates,’” in Darwin
Cartwright and Alvin Zander, eds., Group Dynamics, 3rd
ed. (New York: Harper & Row, 1968) 319.
	15.	 Peter M. Senge, “Leading Learning Organizations,” in
Richard Beckhard et al., eds., The Leader of the Future (San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996); Bernard M. Bass and M. J.
Avolio, “Transformational Leadership and Organizational
Culture,” International Journal of Public Administration 17
(1994): 541–54; Lynn Little, “Transformational Leader-
ship,” Academic Leadership 15 (November 1999): 4–5.
	16.	 Francis Y. Yammarino and Alan J. Dubinsky, “Transfor-
mational Leadership Theory: Using Levels of Analysis to
Determine Boundary Conditions,” Personnel Psychology 47
(1994): 787–809; L. Little, “Transformational Leadership,”
Academic Leadership 15 (November 1999): 4–9.
Appendix B  Speeches for Analysis and Discussion
	 1.	 Martin Luther King Jr., “I Have a Dream,” reprinted by
arrangement with The Heirs to the Estate of Martin Luther
King Jr., c/o Writers House, as agent for the proprietor,
New York, NY. Copyright 1963. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
copyright renewed in 1991 Coretta Scott King.
	 2.	 Barack Obama, “Inaugural Address,” as appeared in Daily
Compilation of Presidential Documents. January 21, 2013.
	 3.	 Daniel Rose, Burstyn Memorial Lecture at Hunter College,
New York City, as appeared in Vital Speeches of the Day
(December 2012): 392–94.
	 4.	 Angelitta Armijo, “Elvis,” Texas State University student
speech, 2013.
Z03_BEEB3981_05_SE_NOTES_455-468.indd 468 11/14/14 9:35 AM
Glossary
acceptance speech:  A speech of thanks for an award, nomina-
tion, or other honor
accommodation:  Sensitivity to the feelings, needs, interests,
and backgrounds of other people
ad hominem:  An attack on irrelevant personal characteristics
of the person who is proposing an idea rather than on the
idea itself
after-dinner speech:  An entertaining speech, usually delivered
in conjunction with a mealtime meeting or banquet
alliteration:  The repetition of a consonant sound (usually the
first consonant) several times in a phrase, clause, or sentence
analogy:  A comparison; also, a special type of inductive rea-
soning that compares one thing, person, or process with
another to predict how something will perform and respond
analysis:  The process of examining the causes, effects, and
­
history of a problem to reach a solution
analytical listener: Someone who prefers messages that are
supported with facts and details
andragogy:  The art and science of teaching adults
anecdote:  A brief story that is often based on fact
antithesis:  Opposition, such as that used in two-part ­
sentences
whose parts have parallel structures but contrasting
­meanings
appeal to misplaced authority: Use of the testimony of an
expert in a given field to endorse an idea or product for
which the expert does not have the appropriate credentials
or ­expertise
articulation:  The production of clear and distinct speech
sounds
attend:  To focus on incoming information
attitude:  A predisposition to respond favorably (like) or unfa-
vorably (dislike) to something
audience adaptation: The process of ethically using informa-
tion about an audience to help the audience clearly under-
stand the message and achieve the speaking objective
audience analysis: The process of examining information
about those who are expected to listen to a speech
award presentation:  A speech that accompanies the conferring
of an award
bandwagon fallacy: Reasoning that suggests that because
every one else believes something or is doing something,
then it must be valid or correct
bar graph:  A graph in which bars of various lengths represent
information
behavioral objective: Statement of the specific purpose of a
speech, expressed in terms of desired audience behavior at
the end of the speech
belief:  An individual’s perception of what is true or false
benefit:  A good result that creates a positive emotional response
in the listener
blueprint:  The central idea of a speech plus a preview of the
main ideas
Boolean search: An advanced Web-searching technique that
allows a user to narrow a subject or keyword search by add-
ing various requirements
boom microphone: A microphone that is suspended from a
bar and moved to follow the speaker; often used in movies
and TV
brainstorming:  A problem-solving technique that can be used
to generate many ideas
brief illustration:  An unelaborated example, often only a sen-
tence or two long
cadence:  The rhythm of language
causal fallacy: A faulty cause-and-effect connection between
two things or events
causal reasoning:  Reasoning in which the relationship between
two or more events leads the person to conclude that one or
more of the events caused the others
cause-and-effect organization:  Organization that focuses on a
situation and its causes or a situation and its effects
central idea:  A one-sentence summary of a speech
ceremonial (epideictic) speech:  A speech delivered on a special
occasion for celebration, thanksgiving, praise, or mourning
channel:  The visual and auditory means by which a message is
transmitted from sender to receiver
charisma:  A form of dynamism characteristic of a talented,
charming, attractive speaker
chart:  A display that summarizes and presents a great deal of
information in a small amount of space
chronological organization:  Organization by time or sequence
cliché:  An overused expression
clip art: Images or pictures stored in a computer file or in
printed form that can be used in a presentation aid
closed-ended questions: Questions that offer several alterna-
tives from which to choose
closure:  The quality of a conclusion that makes a speech
“sound finished”
code:  A verbal or nonverbal symbol for an idea or image that
an audience can recognize
cognitive dissonance: The sense of mental discomfort that
prompts a person to change when new information conflicts
with previously organized thought patterns
commemorative address:  A speech delivered during ceremo-
nies held in memory of some past event and often the person
or persons involved
commencement address: A speech delivered at a graduation
or commencement ceremony
common ground: Ways in which you and your listeners are
alike
competence:  Being informed, skilled, or knowledgeable about
one’s subject
complexity:  Arrangement of the ideas in a speech from the
simplest to the more complex
concise:  Succinct or to the point
conclusion:  The logical outcome of a deductive argument,
which stems from the major premise and the minor premise
connotation:  The meaning listeners associate with a word,
based on past experience
consensus:  The support and commitment of all group mem-
bers to the final decision of the group
469
Z04_BEEB3981_05_SE_Gloss_469-474.indd 469 11/14/14 5:48 PM
Glossary
﻿
470
elocution:  The expression of emotion through posture, move-
ment, gestures, facial expression, and voice
emotional contagion theory:  A theory suggesting that people
“catch” the emotions of others
emotional response theory: Theory suggesting that human
emotional responses can be classified as eliciting feelings of
pleasure, arousal, or dominance
empowerment:  The capacity to influence and potentially lead,
gained in part by speaking with competence and confidence
encode:  To translate ideas and images into verbal or nonverbal
symbols that an audience can recognize
epideictic speech:  See ceremonial speech
ethical speech:  Speech that is responsible, honest, and tolerant
ethics:  The beliefs, values, and moral principles by which peo-
ple determine what is right or wrong
ethnic vernacular: A variety of English that includes words
and phrases used by a specific ethnic group
ethnicity:  The portion of a person’s cultural background that
includes such factors as nationality, religion, language, and
ancestral heritage, which are shared by a group of people
who also share a common geographical region.
ethnocentrism:  An assumption that one’s own culture and cul-
tural perspectives and methods are superior to those of others
ethos:  The term that Aristotle used to refer to a speaker’s
­credibility
eulogy:  A speech of tribute to someone who has died
evidence:  The facts, examples, opinions, and statistics that a
speaker uses to support a conclusion
example:  An illustration used to dramatize or clarify a fact
expert testimony: An opinion offered by someone who is an
authority on the subject under discussion
explanation:  A statement of how something is done or why it
exists in its present form or existed in its past form
extemporaneous speaking:  Speaking from a written or memo-
rized speech outline without having the exact wording of the
speech in front of you or in memory
extended illustration: A detailed example that resembles a
story
external noise:  Physical sounds that interfere with communi-
cation
fact:  Information that has been proven to be true through
direct observation
fallacy:  False reasoning that occurs when someone attempts to
persuade without adequate evidence or with arguments that
are irrelevant or inappropriate
feature:  A characteristic of something you are describing
feedback:  Verbal and nonverbal responses provided by an
audience to a speaker
figurative analogy: A comparison between two essentially
­
dissimilar things that share some feature on which the
­comparison depends
figure of speech: Language that deviates from the ordinary,
expected meanings of words to make a description or
­
comparison unique, vivid, and memorable
final summary: A restatement of the main ideas of a speech,
occurring near the end of the speech
First Amendment: The amendment to the U.S. Constitu-
tion that guarantees freedom of speech; the first of the ten
amendments to the U.S. Constitution that are known collec-
tively as the Bill of Rights
context:  The environment or situation in which a speech
occurs
credibility:  An audience’s perception of a speaker as compe-
tent, trustworthy, knowledgeable, and dynamic
crisis rhetoric:  Language used by speakers during momentous
or overwhelming times
criteria:  Standards for identifying an acceptable solution to a
problem
critical listener:  Someone who prefers to evaluate messages
critical listening: The process of listening to evaluate the
­
quality, appropriateness, value, or importance of the infor-
mation put forth by a speaker
critical thinking: The mental process of making judgments
about the conclusions that are presented in what you see,
hear, and read
culture:  A learned system of knowledge, behavior, attitudes,
beliefs, values, and norms that is shared by a group of people
declamation:  The delivery of an already famous speech
decode:  To translate verbal or nonverbal symbols into ideas
and images that constitute a message
deductive reasoning: Reasoning that moves from a general
statement or principle to a specific, certain conclusion
definition:  A statement of what a term means or how it is
applied in a specific instance
definition by classification: A “dictionary definition,” con-
structed by first placing a term in the general class to which
it belongs and then differentiating it from all other members
of that class
demagogue:  A speaker who attempts to gain control over
­
others by using unethical emotional pleas and appeals to
listeners’ prejudices
demographic audience analysis: Analyzing an audience by
examining demographic information so as to develop a clear
and effective message
demographics:  Statistical information about population
­
characteristics such as age, sexual orientation, race, gender,
educational level, and ideological or religious views
denotation:  The literal meaning of a word
derived credibility: The perception of a speaker’s credibility
that an audience forms during a speech
description:  A word picture of something
dialect:  A consistent style of pronouncing words that is com-
mon to an ethnic group or geographic region
direct persuasion route: Persuasion that occurs when audi-
ence members critically examine evidence and arguments
disposition:  The process of organizing and arranging ideas
and illustrations in an orderly speech
domain:  The category in which a Web site is located on the
Internet, indicated by the last three letters of the site’s URL
dynamism:  An aspect of a speaker’s credibility that reflects
whether the speaker is perceived as energetic
either/or fallacy: The oversimplification of an issue into a
choice between only two outcomes or possibilities
elaborate:  From the standpoint of the elaboration likelihood
model (ELM) of persuasion, to think about information,
ideas, and issues related to the content of a message
elaboration likelihood model (ELM) of persuasion:  The the-
ory that listeners can be persuaded directly, by logic, reason-
ing, and evidence, or indirectly, by their overall impression
of the message
Z04_BEEB3981_05_SE_Gloss_469-474.indd 470 11/14/14 5:48 PM
Glossary ﻿ 471
leadership:  The process of influencing other people through
communication
line graph:  A graph that uses lines or curves to show relation-
ships between two or more variables
listening:  The process by which receivers select, attend to,
­
create meaning from, remember, and respond to senders’
­messages
listening styles:  Preferred ways of making sense out of spoken
messages
literal analogy:  A comparison between two similar things
literary quotation: An opinion or description by a writer,
expressed in a memorable and often poetic way
logic:  A formal system of rules that is used to reach a rational
conclusion
logos:  Literally, “the word”; the term that Aristotle used to
refer to logic—the formal system of using rules to reach a
rational conclusion
main ideas: The key points of a speech; subdivisions of the
central idea
major premise:  A general statement that is the first element of
a syllogism
malapropism:  The mistaken use of a word that sounds like the
intended word
manuscript speaking:  Reading a speech from a written text
mapping:  Use of geometric shapes to sketch how all the main
ideas, subpoints, and supporting material of a speech relate
to the central idea and to one another
memorized speaking: Delivering a speech word for word
from memory without using notes
message:  The content of a speech plus the way in which it
is said
metaphor:  An implied comparison of two things or concepts
that are similar in some vital way
minor premise:  A specific statement about an example that is
linked to the major premise; the second element of a syllo-
gism
model:  A small object that represents a larger object
motivation:  An internal force that drives people to achieve
their goals
myth:  A belief based on the shared values, cultural heritage,
and faith of a group of people
nomination speech: 
A speech that officially recommends
someone as a candidate for an office or position
non sequitur:  Latin for “it does not follow”; an idea or conclu-
sion that does not logically relate to or follow from the previ-
ous idea or conclusion
nonverbal communication: Communication other than writ-
ten or spoken language that creates meaning
nonverbal expectancy theory: A communication theory sug-
gesting that if listeners’ expectations about how communica-
tion should be expressed are violated, listeners will feel less
favorable toward the communicator of the message
nonverbal transition:  A facial expression, vocal cue, or physi-
cal movement that indicates that a speaker is moving from
one idea to the next
omission:  Leaving out a word or phrase the listener expects
to hear
online database:  An electronic resource that includes abstracts
and/or the full text of entries in addition to bibliographic
data
font:  A particular style of typeface
forum:  A question-and-answer session that usually follows a
public discussion or symposium
free speech:  Legally protected speech or speech acts
gender:  The culturally constructed and psychologically based
perception of one’s self as feminine or masculine.
general purpose:  The overarching goal of a speech: to inform,
to persuade, or to entertain
generalization:  An all-encompassing statement
graph:  A pictorial representation of statistical data
hard evidence:  Factual examples and statistics
hasty generalization:  A conclusion reached without adequate
evidence
hyperbole:  Exaggeration
hypothetical illustration: An example that describes a situ-
ation or event that might happen but that has not actually
occurred
illustration:  A story that provides an example of an idea, issue,
or problem the speaker is discussing
immediacy:  The degree of physical or psychological closeness
between people
immediacy behaviors: Nonverbal expressions of closeness to
and liking for an audience, made through such means as
physical approach or eye contact
impromptu speaking: Delivering a speech without advance
preparation
indirect persuasion route:  Persuasion that occurs as a result of
factors peripheral to a speaker’s logic and argument, such as
the speaker’s charisma or emotional appeals
inductive reasoning:  Reasoning that uses specific instances or
examples to reach a general, probable conclusion
inference:  A conclusion based on partial information or an
evaluation that has not been directly observed
inflection:  The variation of the pitch of the voice
initial credibility: The impression of a speaker’s credibility
that listeners have before the speaker starts a speech
initial preview:  A statement in the introduction of a speech of
what the main ideas of the speech will be
internal noise: Anything physiological or psychological that
interferes with communication
internal preview:  A statement in the body of speech that intro-
duces and outlines ideas that will be developed as the speech
progresses
internal summary:  A restatement in the body of a speech of the
ideas that have been developed so far
invention:  The development or discovery of new insights or
new approaches to old problems
inversion:  Reversal of the normal word order of a phrase or
sentence
jargon:  The specialized language of a profession or hobby
kairos:  The circumstances surrounding or the occasion for a
speech
keynote address:  A speech that sets the theme and tone for a
meeting or conference
ladder of abstraction:  Continuum model of abstract and con-
crete words for a concept, idea, or thing
lavaliere microphone:  A microphone that can be clipped to an
article of clothing or worn on a cord around the neck
lay testimony: An opinion or description offered by a non­
expert who has firsthand experience
Z04_BEEB3981_05_SE_Gloss_469-474.indd 471 11/14/14 5:48 PM
Glossary
﻿
472
psychological audience analysis: Analyzing the attitudes,
beliefs, values, and other psychological information about
an audience to develop a clear and effective message
public-relations speech:  A speech designed to inform the pub-
lic, to strengthen alliances with them, and in some cases to
recommend policy
public speaking: The process of presenting a message to an
audience
pun:  A verbal device that uses double meanings to create
humor
race:  A person’s biological heritage
reasoning:  The process of drawing a conclusion from evidence
reasoning by sign:  Using the existence of one or more events
to reach a specific conclusion that another event has occurred
or will occur
receiver:  A listener or an audience member
recency:  Arrangement of the ideas in a speech from the least to
the most important
red herring: Irrelevant facts or information used to distract
someone from the issue under discussion
reflective thinking: 
A method of structuring a problem-
solving discussion that involves (1) identifying and defining
the problem, (2) analyzing the problem, (3) generating pos-
sible solutions, (4) selecting the best solution, and (5) testing
and implementing the solution
regionalism:  A word or phrase used uniquely by speakers in
one part of a country
relational-oriented listener:  Someone who is comfortable lis-
tening to others express feelings and emotions
relationship:  An ongoing connection with another person
reluctant testimony: 
A statement by someone who has
reversed his or her position on a given issue
remember:  To recall ideas and information
repetition:  Use of a key word or phrase more than once for
emphasis
respond:  to react with a change in behavior to a speaker’s
­message
rhetoric:  The use of words and symbols to achieve a goal
rhetorical criticism:  The process of using a method or standards
to evaluate the effectiveness and appropriateness of messages
rhetorical question: A question that is intended to provoke
thought rather than to elicit an answer
rhetorical strategies:  Methods and techniques used by speak-
ers to achieve their goals
secondary source:  An individual, organization, or publication
that reports information or data gathered by another entity
select:  To single out a message from several competing ones
self-actualization:  The need to achieve one’s highest potential
sex:  A person’s biological status as male or female, as reflected
in his or her anatomy and reproductive system
signposts:  Cues about the relationships between a speaker’s
ideas
simile:  A comparison between two things that uses the word
like or as
situational audience analysis: Analyzing the time and place
of a speech, the audience size, and the speaking occasion to
develop a clear and effective message
small group communication:  Interaction among from three to
twelve people who share a common purpose, feel a sense of
belonging to the group, and influence one another
open-ended questions: Questions that allow for unrestricted
answers
operational definition: A definition that explains how some-
thing works or what it does or that describes procedures for
observing or measuring the concept being defined
opinion:  Testimony or a quotation that expresses someone’s
attitudes, beliefs, or values
oral citation:  The oral presentation of such information about a
source as the author, title, and year of publication
panel discussion: A group discussion designed to inform an
audience about issues or a problem or to make recommen-
dations
parallelism:  Use of the same grammatical pattern for two or
more clauses or sentences
pathos:  The term that Aristotle used to refer to appeals to
­emotion
pedagogy:  The art and science of teaching children
periodical index: A listing of bibliographical data for articles
published in a group of magazines and/or journals during
a given time period
personification:  The attribution of human qualities to inani-
mate things or ideas
persuasion:  The process of changing or reinforcing a listener’s
attitudes, beliefs, values, or behavior
picture graph:  A graph that uses images or pictures to symbol-
ize data
pie graph:  A circular graph divided into wedges that show the
distribution of data
pitch:  The highness or lowness of voice sounds
patchwriting:  Using someone else’s phrases in a speech with-
out acknowledging the source
plagiarize:  To present someone else’s ideas as though they
were one’s own
preliminary bibliography: A list of potential resources to be
used in the preparation of a speech
preparation outline: A detailed outline that includes main
ideas, subpoints, and supporting material and that may also
include a speech’s specific purpose, introduction, blueprint,
signposts, and conclusion
presentation aid: Any tangible object, image, or sound that
helps to communicate an idea to an audience
preview:  A statement of what is to come
primacy:  Arrangement of the ideas in a speech from the most
to the least important
primary source:  The original collector and interpreter of infor-
mation or data
problem–solution organization:  Organization that focuses on
a problem and various solutions or a solution and the prob-
lems it would solve
pronunciation:  The proper use of sounds to form words
clearly and accurately
proposition:  A statement with which a speaker wants an audi-
ence to agree
proposition of fact: A proposition that focuses on whether
something is true or false or whether it did or did not
happen
proposition of policy:  A proposition that advocates a change
in a policy, procedure, or behavior
proposition of value:  A proposition that calls for a listener to
judge the worth or importance of something
Z04_BEEB3981_05_SE_Gloss_469-474.indd 472 11/14/14 5:48 PM
Glossary ﻿ 473
target audience: A specific segment of an audience that you
most want to address or influence
task-oriented listener:  Someone who prefers information that
is well organized, brief, and precise
team:  A coordinated small group of people organized to work
together, with clearly defined roles and responsibilities,
explicit rules, and well-defined goals
terminal credibility: The final impression listeners have of a
speaker’s credibility, after a speech concludes
toast:  A brief salute to a momentous occasion
topical organization:  Organization of the natural divisions in
a central idea on the basis of recency, primacy, complexity, or
the speaker’s preference
transformational leadership: 
The process of influencing
­
others by building a shared vision of the future, inspiring
­
others to achieve, developing high-quality individual rela-
tionships with others, and helping people see how what they
do is related to a larger framework or system
transition:  A verbal or nonverbal signal that a speaker has
­
finished discussing one idea and is moving to another
trustworthiness:  An aspect of a speaker’s credibility that
reflects whether the speaker is perceived as believable and
­honest
understand:  To assign meaning to the stimuli to which you
attend
understatement:  Downplaying a fact or event
value:  An enduring concept of right and wrong, good and bad
verbal irony: Expressing the exact opposite of the intended
meaning
verbal transition:  A word or phrase that indicates the relation-
ship between two ideas
vertical search engine: A Web site that indexes World Wide
Web information in a specific field
visual rhetoric:  The use of images as an integrated element in
the total communication effort a speaker makes to achieve
the speaking goal
volume:  The softness or loudness of a speaker’s voice
wit:  Relating an incident that concludes in an unexpected way
word picture:  A vivid description that appeals to the senses
working memory theory of listening:  A theory that suggests
that listeners find it difficult to concentrate and remember
when their short-term working memories are full
World Wide Web:  The primary information-delivery system of
the Internet
written citation:  The presentation in print of such information
about a source as the author, title, and year of publication,
­
usually formatted according to a conventional style guide
social judgment theory: The theory that listeners’ responses
to persuasive messages fall in the category of latitude
of ­
acceptance, the latitude of rejection, or the latitude of
­noncommitment
socioeconomic status: A person’s perceived importance and
influence based on factors such as income, occupation, and
education level
soft evidence: 
Supporting material based on opinion or
­
inference; includes hypothetical illustrations, descriptions,
explanations, definitions, analogies, and opinions.
source:  The public speaker
spatial organization: Organization according to location or
direction
speaking notes: 
A brief outline used when a speech is
delivered
specific purpose: A concise statement of what you want
your listeners to know, feel, or be able to do when you finish
­speaking
speech act:  A behavior, such as burning a flag, that is viewed
by law as nonverbal communication and is subject to the
same protections and limitations as verbal speech
speech of introduction: A speech that provides information
about another speaker
speech to inform: A speech that shares information with
­
others to enhance their knowledge or understanding about
ideas, concepts, principles, or processes
speech topic:  The key focus of the content of a speech
spoonerism:  A play on words involving the switching of the
initial sounds of the words in a phrase
stacks:  The collection of books in a library
standard outline form:  Numbered and lettered headings and
subheadings arranged hierarchically to indicate the relation-
ships among the various parts of a speech
Standard American English: The English taught by schools
and used in the media, business, and government in the
United States
stationary microphone:  A microphone that is found attached
to a podium, sitting on a desk, or standing on the floor
statistics:  Numerical data that summarize facts or samples
summary:  A recap of what has been said
suspension:  Withholding a key word or phrase until the end
of a sentence
syllogism:  A three-part way of developing an argument, using
a major premise, a minor premise, and a conclusion
symbols:  Words, images, and behaviors that create meaning
symposium:  A public discussion in which a series of short
speeches is presented to an audience
Z04_BEEB3981_05_SE_Gloss_469-474.indd 473 11/14/14 5:48 PM
Credits
Text
Chapter 1  p. 1: Charles Schwab, as quoted in Brent ­
Filson,
Executive Speeches: Tips on How to Write and Deliver Speeches
from 51 CEOs (New York: Wiley, 1994) 45; p. 3: James C.
Humes, The Sir Winston Method: Five Secrets of Speaking the
Language of Leadership (New York: Morrow, 1991) 13–14;
p. 4: Valueinvestorsportal. “Warren Buffet on Communica-
tion Skills.” YouTube. 6 December, 2010. Web. http://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=tpgcEYpLzP0 Accessed May 14,
2013; p. 4: Dee-Ann Durbin, “Study: Plenty of Jobs for
Graduates in 2000,” Austin American-Statesman 5 Dec. 1999:
A28; p. 8: L. M. Boyd, syndicated column, Austin American-
Statesman 8 Aug. 2000: E3; p. 9: Franklin D. Roosevelt,
speech before Congress, December 8, 1941; p. 9: Ronald
Reagan, June 12, 1987; p. 9: Elie Wiesel, The Perils of Indif-
ference, April 12, 1999; p. 9: Obama, Barack. “Remarks by
the President at Sandy Hook Interfaith Prayer Vigil” The
White House Briefing Room. 16 Dec 2012. Web. 05 July 2013
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/12/16/
remarks-president-sandy-hook-interfaith-prayer-vigil
Chapter 2  p. 15: Sheboygan Press, Sheboygan, Wisconsin,
Tuesday, September 8, 1953 by Drew Pearson; p. 16: Jerry
Seinfeld
Chapter 3  p. 29: Daniel Webster, U.S. Secretary of State,
1850–1852; p. 33: J.C. Pearson, J.T. Child, and D.H. Kahl, Jr.,
“Preparation Meeting Opportunity: How Do College
­
Students Prepare for Public Speeches?” Communication
Quarterly, 54:3 (Aug. 2006): 351–66; pp. 36–37: Clifford
Stoll, as cited in Kevin A. Miller, “Capture: The Essential
Survival Skill for Leaders Buckling Under Information
Overload,” Leadership (Spring 1992): 85; p. 37: Woodrow
Wilson; p. 42: Copyrighted by Pearson Education, Upper
Saddle River, NJ; p. 42: Franklin D. Roosevelt; pp. 43–45:
Reprinted by permission of Grace Hildenbrand
Chapter 4  p. 50: Jason Pontin, “Free Speech in the Era of
Its Technological Amplification,” MIT Technology Review
116.2 (March/April 2013): 62; p. 51: Quintilian; p. 51: Used
with permission from the National Communication Asso-
ciation, www.natcom.org; p. 52: “Obama Counter-Terrorism
Speech Interrupted by Heckler,” UPI.com. 23 May 2013;
p. 52: Samuel Walker, Hate Speech (Lincoln: U of Nebraska
P, 1994) 162; p. 52: “Libel and Slander,” The Ethical Spectacle.
1 June 1997; p. 52: “Three Decades Later, Free Speech Vets
Return to UC Berkeley,” Sacramento Bee 3 Dec. 1994: A1;
p. 52: James S. Tyre, “Legal Definition of Obscenity, Por-
nography.” 1 June 1997; p. 52: United States Constitution;
p. 53: “Supreme Court Rules: Cyberspace Will Be Free!
ACLU Hails Victory in Internet Censorship Challenge,”
American Civil Liberties Union Freedom Network, 26 June
1997, 1 June 1998 http://https://www.aclu.org/technology-
and-liberty/aclu-hails-supreme-court-victory-internet-
censorship-challenge; p. 53 Sue Anne Pressley, “Oprah
Winfrey Wins Case Filed by Cattlemen,” Washington Post
27 Feb. 1998; p. 53: Associated Press, “Free-Speech, Other
Groups File Briefs Opposing Patriot Act.” 4 Nov; p. 53:
Brian Schweitzer, “Proclamation of Clemency for Montan-
ans Convicted under the Montana Sedition Act in 1918–
1919.” 3 May 2006. (Thanks to George Moss, Vaughn
College, Flushing, NY, for providing the authors with a
copy of this document.); p. 53: Terry Phillips, “Opinion: In
Defense of Free Speech and Helen Thomas.” MercuryNews
.com. 15 June 2010; p. 54: www.freespeechdebate.com; p. 55:
Samuel Walker, Hate Speech (Lincoln: U of Nebraska P,
1994) 162; p. 56: Edwin R. Bayley, Joe McCarthy and the
Press (Madison: Wisconsin U P, 1981) 29; p. 57: “Spurlock
Sorry for Speech,” Austin American-Statesman 29 Mar. 2006:
A2; p. 57: Kathy Fitzpatrick, “U.S. Public Diplomacy,”
­
Vital Speeches of the Day (April 2004): 412–17; p. 58: Publi-
cation Manual of the American Psychological Association,
6th ed. (Washington, DC: American Psychological Asso-
ciation, 2010) 16; p. 58: Scott Jaschik, “Graduation Shame.”
Insidehighered.com. 22 Apr. 2010; p. 60: “Bed Bugs.” Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 13 January 2013. Web.
9 June 2013
Chapter 5  p. 65: Plutarch; p. 74: K. K. Halone and L. L.
Pecchioni, “Relational Listening: A Grounded Theoretical
Model,” COMMUNICATION REPORTS 14 (2001): 59–71;
p. 80: Aristotle; p. 80: Harold Barrett, Rhetoric and Civility:
Human Development, Narcissism, and the Good Audience
(Albany: SUNY, 1991) 154; p. 81: Patricia Sullivan, “Signifi-
cation and African-American Rhetoric: A Case Study of
Jesse Jackson’s ‘Common Ground and Common Sense’
Speech,” Communication Quarterly 41.1 (1993): 11;
p. 85: Isocrates, Isocrates, Vol. II. Translated by George
­
Norlin (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1929).
Also see “Isocrates,” in Bizzell and Herzberg, The Rhetorical
Tradition
Chapter 6  p. 95: Aristotle, Born: 384 BC, Died: 322 BC;
p. 104: Robert H. Farrell, ed., Off the Record: The Private
Papers of Harry S Truman (New York: Harper & Row, 1980)
310; pp. 113–114; Donald E. Brown, “Human Universals
and Their Implications,” in N. Roughley, ed., Being
Humans: Anthropological Universality and Particularity in
Transdisciplinary Perspectives (New York: Walter de Gruyter,
2000); p. 120: Sweets, “Mark Twain in India,” The Fence
Painter: Bulletin of the Mark Twain Boyhood Home Associates
26 (Winter 1996): 1
Chapter 7  p. 131: Cicero, Born: January 3, 106 BC, Died:
December 7, 43 BC; p. 134: Roger Fringer, “Choosing a
Speech Topic,” in Tasha Van Horn, Lori Charron, and
Michael Charron, Allyn & Bacon Video II User’s Guide, 2002;
p. 135: Bruce Gronbeck, from his presidential address
delivered at the annual conference of the Speech Communi-
cation Association, Nov. 1994; p. 140: Monique Russo, “The
‘Starving Disease’ or Anorexia Nervosa,” student speech,
474
Z05_BEEB3981_05_SE_CREDIT_474-479.indd 474 11/20/14 11:02 AM
Credits ﻿ 475
University of Miami, 1984; p. 140: Brian Sosnowchik, “The
Cries of American Ailments,” Winning Orations 2000
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 2000): 114;
p. 144: Judith Humphrey, “Taking the Stage: How Women
Can Achieve a Leadership Presence,” Vital Speeches of the
Day (May 2001): 437; p. 148: “Shuttle Missions.” Space
­Shuttle. Nasa.gov, 29 August 2011; p. 149: Adapted from
­
Nicole Tremel, “The New Wasteland: Computers,” Winning
­Orations 2000 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
­
Association, 2000): 37–40; p. 149: Patrick Martin, “The Energy
Cure that Kills: Hydraulic Fracturing for Natural Gas,”
Winning Orations 2011 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2011): 147
Chapter 8  p. 153: Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, A letter to Youth.
Bequest to the Academic Youth of Soviet Russia, Science,
Vol 85, No. 2155 (April 77), p. 369. (1936); p. 159: Courtesy
of Albert B. Alkek Library, Texas State University, San
­
Marcos; p. 162: Charles Osgood, “On Civility in the
­Media,” Vital Speeches of the Day (September 2011): 316–18;
p. 165: Michael Cunningham, quoted in Dinitia Smith, “In
the Age of the Overamplified, a Resurgence for the ­
Humble
Lecture,” New York Times 17 Mar. 2006: B1, B5; p. 165:
­
Sandra Zimmer, quoted in Vickie K. Sullivan, ­
“Public
Speaking: The Secret Weapon in Career Development,”
USA Today 24–25 May 2005: 133; p. 165: Hillary Rodham
Clinton, “Women’s Progress Is Human Progress,” Vital
Speeches of the Day (May 2010): 199–203; p. 165: Kevin Rudd,
“The Apology to the Forgotten Australians,” Vital Speeches
of the Day (January 2010): 2–6; p. 166: Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo,
“Connecting the Next Billion: The New Frontier of Upward
Mobility,” Vital Speeches of the Day (March 2010): 130–33;
p. 166: Tunette Powell, “It’s Not the Addict, It’s the Drug:
Redefining America’s War on Drugs,” Winning ­Orations
2012 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association,
2012): 102; p. 167: Andrew B. Wilson, “How to Craft a Win-
ing Speech,” Vital Speeches of the Day (September 2005):
685–89; p. 167: David Cameron, “I’m for a Referendum on
British Membership in the EU,” Vital Speeches of the Day
(February 2013): 34–35; p. 167: Alexandria Wisner, “Lithium
Cell Batteries: The Power to Kill,” Winning Orations 2011.
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor; p. 167: Alexandria Wisner, “Lithium Cell
Batteries: The Power to Kill,” Winning Orations 2011.
­
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor; p. 167: Matthew Cossolotto, “An Urgent
Call to Action for Study Abroad Alumni to Help Reduce
Our Global Awareness Deficit,” Vital Speeches of the Day
­
(December 2009): 564–68; p. 168: Patrick Martin, “The
­
Energy Cure that Kills: Hydraulic Fracturing for Natural
Gas,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate Oratorical Associa-
tion, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 168: Patrick
Martin, “The Energy Cure that Kills: Hydraulic Fracturing
for Natural Gas,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate Oratori-
cal Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor;
p. 168: Nicole Platzar, “Rated ‘D’ for Deficiency: The Sun-
shine Vitamin,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate Oratori-
cal Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor;
p. 168: Nicole Platzar, “Rated ‘D’ for Deficiency: The
Sunshine Vitamin,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate
­
Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry
Schnoor; p. 169: James Stanfill, “Entomophagy: The Other
Other White Meat,” Winning Orations 2009 (Mankato, MN:
Interstate Oratorical Association, 2009): 24; p. 170: Throb-
jØrn Jagland, “May Good Government Win in Europe,”
­
Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2013): 52–54; p. 170:
­
Indra Nooyi, “Short-Term Demands Vs. Long-Term
­Responsibilities,” Vital Speeches of the Day (June 2010): 246–
50; p. 171: Ivan Seidenberg, “How the Government Can
Promote a Healthy, Competitive Communications Indus-
try,” Vital Speeches of the Day (1 Dec. 2009): 540–43; p. 172:
Michael Blastland and David Spiegelhalter, The Norm
Chronicles: Stories and Numbers about Danger (London:
­
Profile Books, 2013) 47; p. 172: Daniel Hinderliter, “Collab-
orative Consumption,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate
Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry
Schnoor; p. 172: Daniel Hinderliter, “Collaborative
­Consumption,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate Oratori-
cal Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor;
p. 172: A. Barry Rand, “Rebuilding the Middle Class: A Blue-
print for the Future,” Vital Speeches of the Day (March 2013):
72–76; p. 172: Andie Malterud, “Dropping the Bomb on
Water Fluoridation,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate
­
Oratorical Association, Manakato, MN, Editor Larry
Schnoor; p. 172: Andie Malterud, “Dropping the Bomb on
Water Fluoridation,” Winning Orations 2012. Interstate Ora-
torical Association, Manakato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor;
p. 173: Data from U.S. Census Bureau, “Health Insurance
Coverage Type by Age, Sex, and Labor Force Status: 2010.”
www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/p70-134.pdf; p. 174:
Dena Craig, “Clearing the Air about Cigars,” Winning
­Orations 1998 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Associa-
tion, 1998) 13; p. 174: Sergio Marchionne, “Navigating the
New Automotive Epoch,” Vital Speeches of the Day
(1 Mar. 2010): 134–37; p. 175: Michael Kelley, “The New
Catch-22: Unemployment Discrimination,” Winning
­Orations 2012. Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato,
MN, Editor Larry Schnoor
Chapter 9  p. 181: Alfred North Whitehead, Died: Decem-
ber 30, 1947. British Association for the Advancement of
Science 1916, section A.; p. 185: Adapted from John Kuehn,
untitled speech, Winning Orations 1994 (Mankato, MN: In-
terstate Oratorical Association, 1994): 83–85; p. 186: Dennis
Lloyd, “Instant Expert: A Brief History of iPod,” iLounge 26
June 2004; “Apple iPod, History of an Icon,” ipod games 20
June 2007; p. 187: Beth Survant, “Let There Be Light,”
­
Winning Orations 2011. (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2011): 53; p. 187: Sarah Perez, “YouTube
Reaches 4 Billion Views Per Day,” techcrunch.com 23 Janu-
ary 2012; Glenn Chapman, “YouTube Serving Up Two Bil-
lion Videos Daily,” Google News 16 May 2010; p. 188: Philip
Shenon, “A Showcase for Indian Artifacts,” New York Times
29 Aug. 2004: TR 3; p. 188: Vonda Ramey, “Can You Read
This?” Winning Orations 1985. Interstate Oratorical Associ-
ation, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 188: Vonda
Ramey, “Can You Read This?” Winning Orations 1985.
­
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Z05_BEEB3981_05_SE_CREDIT_474-479.indd 475 11/20/14 11:02 AM
Credits
﻿
476
Larry Schnoor; p. 189: Joseph Jones, “The Facts About
­For-Profit Universities,” Winning Orations 2011. Interstate
Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry
Schnoor; p. 189: Cynthia Starks, “How to Write a Speech,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (April 2010). Reprinted by permis-
sion of the author; p. 192: Martin Medhurst, “The Text(ure)
of the World in Presidential Rhetoric,” Vital Speeches of the
Day (June 2012); p. 192: Reprinted by the permission of the
American Cancer Society, Inc. All rights reserved; p. 193:
Anastasia Danilyuk, “Alternatives to Imprisonment,”
­
Winning Orations 2011. Interstate Oratorical Association,
Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 193: “Nichole
­
Olson, “Flying the Safer Skies,” Winning Orations 2000.
­
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor; p. 195: Robert Gore, untitled speech,
­
Winning Orations 2012. Interstate Oratorical Association,
Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 195: Molly A.
Lovell, “Hotel Security: The Hidden Crisis,” Winning
­Orations 1994 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
­
Association, 1994): 18; p. 197: Neela Latey, “U.S. Customs
Procedures: Danger to Americans’ Health and Society,”
Winning Orations 1986. Interstate Oratorical Association,
Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 197: Susan Stevens,
“Teacher Shortage,” Winning Orations 1986. Interstate
­
Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry
Schnoor; p. 197: Ben Crosby, “The New College Disease,”
Winning Orations 2000 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2000): 133; p. 199: John O’Brien, quoted in
Brent Filson, Executive Speeches (New York: Wiley, 1994)
144–45; p. 200: Charles Parnell, “Speechwriting: The Pro-
fession and the Practice,” Vital Speeches of the Day (15 Jan.
1990): 56
Chapter 10  p. 211: Anonymous; p. 214: Lauren Holstein,
“Slavery in the Sunshine State,” Winning Orations 2012.
­
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor; p. 214: Sheena Holliday, “Uninvited
­Visitor,” Winning Orations 2003 (Mankato, MN: Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2003): 84; p. 215: Edwin Pittock,
“America’s Crisis in Aging,” Vital Speeches of the Day
­
(February 2004); p. 215: Charles W. Chesnutt, Frederick
Douglass. Electronic edition published by Academic ­
Affairs
Library, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2001;
p. 216: Cadie Thompson, “Twitter CEO Dick Costolo Gives
New Grads Advice to Be ‘Bold,’” CNBC 6 May 2013;
p. 216: Jennifer Sweeney, “Racial Profiling,” Winning
­Orations 2000 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Associ-
ation, 2000): 1; p. 217: Matt Miller, “A Situational Speech:
Bisphenol A,” Winning Orations 2009. Interstate Oratorical
Association, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; pp. 217–
218: Matt Miller, “A Situational Speech: Bisphenol A,”
Winning Orations 2009. Interstate Oratorical Association,
Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 218: Statistics from
“Which Law School Graduates Have the Most Debt?” U.S.
News and World Report Best Law Schools, 2013; p. 218: Terrika
Scott, “Curing Crisis with Community,” Winning Orations
1995. Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN,
­
Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 219: Theresa Clinkenbeard,
“The  Loss of Childhood,” Winning Orations 1984
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1984): 4;
p. 219: Thad Noyes, “Dishonest Death Care,” Winning
­Orations 1999. Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato,
MN, ­
Editor Larry Schnoor; p. 219: Marvin Olasky,
­
“Responding to Disaster,” Vital Speeches of the Day
­
(November 2006): 744. Reprinted by permission of Marvin
Olasky; p. 220: Joe Griffith, Speaker’s Library of Business
­
Stories, Anecdotes, and Humor (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
­
Prentice Hall, 1990) 335; p. 220: Douglas MacArthur,
“Farewell to the Cadets,” ­
address ­
delivered at West Point,
12 May 1962. Reprinted in Richard L. Johannesen, R. R.
­
Allen, and Wil A. Linkugel, eds., ­
Contemporary American
Speeches, 7th ed. (Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 1992) 393;
p. 220: Jascha Hoffman, “Me Translate Funny One Day,”
The New York Times Book Review 21 October 2012: 31; p. 221:
Muhtar Kent, “Are We Ready for Tomorrow, Today?” Vital
Speeches of the Day (March 2010): 117–21; p. 221: Richard
Propes, “Alone in the Dark,” Winning Orations 1985
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1985): 22;
p. 221: Luis Proenza, “Relevance, Connectivity and Pro-
ductivity.” Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2010): 89–92;
p. 222: Cynthia Starks, “How to Write a Speech,” ­
Vital
Speeches of the Day (April 2010): 153–56. Reprinted by
­
permission of the author; pp. 222–223: Adam Winegarden,
“The After-Dinner Speech,” in Tasha Van Horn, Lori
­
Charron, and Michael Charron, eds., Allyn & Bacon Video II
User’s Guide, 2002; p. 223: William G. Durden, “Just Do
­Science,” Vital Speeches of the Day (March 2013): 67–71;
p. 223: Chris Miller, “ Remember Both the Art and the
­
Business Involved in Collision Repair,” Vital Speeches of the
Day (May 2010): 203–13; p. 223: Chris ­
Christie, “The Adults
Are in Charge,” Vital Speeches of the Day (March 2013)
82–87; p. 224: Student speech, University of Miami, 1981
Chapter 11  p. 227: John Heywood 1497–1580; p. 228: Lou
Gehrig, “Farewell Speech,” Lou Gehrig: The Official Web Site
23 June 2007; p. 228: Robert Lehrman, “Victory Speeches,”
The New York Times 7 November 2012; p. 229: Noelle
­
Stephens, “The WWW.CON of Higher Education,”
­
Winning Orations 1999 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 1999): 12; p. 229: John Ryan, “Emissions
­
Tampering: Get the Lead Out,” Winning Orations 1985.
­
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor; p. 230: Melanie Loehwing, untitled speech,
Winning Orations 2003 (Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical
Association, 2003): 23–24; p. 230: Richard Kelley, “Ready,
Aim, Thrive: Strategies for 2007,” Vital Speeches of the Day
(December 2006): 763–67; p. 231: Bono, “Because We Can,
We Must.” University of Pennsylvania, Almanac Between
­Issues 19 May 2004; p. 232: Matt Miller, “A Situational
Speech: Bisphenol A” from Winning Orations 2009.
­
Interstate Oratorical ­
Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor; p. 232: James W. Robinson, “Create a
­Fireworks Finale,” Executive Speeches (April 1989): 41–44
Chapter 12  p. 235: Peggy Noonan. What I Saw at the
­
Revolution: A Political Life in the Reagan Era. Random
House, 2003; p. 237: David Crystal, “Speaking of Writing
and Writing of Speaking,” Longman Dictionaries: Express
Z05_BEEB3981_05_SE_CREDIT_474-479.indd 476 11/20/14 11:02 AM
Credits ﻿ 477
Yourself with Confidence! (Pearson Education, 2005); p. 238:
Nemanja Savic, “Hope in the Voices of Africa,” speech
­
delivered at Wake Forest University, 14 May 2006. Window
on Wake ­
Forest. 15 May 2006; p. 239: Rep. Barbara Jordan,
1992 ­
Democratic National Convention Keynote Address;
p. 240: Paul Roberts, “How to Say Nothing in Five Hun-
dred Words,” in William H. Roberts and Gregoire Turge-
son, eds., About Language (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1986) 28; p. 240: George Orwell, “Politics and the English
Language,” in William H. Roberts and Gregoire Turgeson,
eds., About Language (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986)
282; p. 240: Erma Bombeck, “Missing Grammar Genes Is,
Like, the Problem,” Austin American-Statesman 3 March
1992; p. 241: John Lister, quoted in “At the End of the Day,
It Annoys.” Associated Press. 24 March 2004; p. 243:
­
William Safire, “Words at War,” New York Times Magazine
30 September 2001; p. 244: Peggy Noonan, What I Saw at
the Revolution (New York: Random House, 1990) 71;
p. 244: Michael M. Klepper, I’d Rather Die Than Give a
Speech (New York: Carol Publishing Group, 1994) 45;
p. 245: We acknowledge the following source for several
examples used in our discussion of language style:
­
William Jordan, “Rhetorical Style,” Oral Communication
Handbook (Warrensburg, MO: Central Missouri State U,
1971–1972) 32–34; p. 245: Eric Stolhanske, “Advice from a
Kid with a Wooden Leg,” Vital Speeches of the Day (July
2012): 211–16; p. 245: Scott Davis, “Class ­
Begins Today,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (August 2011): 279–80; p. 245:
Michiko Kakutani, “Struggling to Find Words for a ­
Horror
Beyond Words,” New York Times 13 Sept. 2001: E1; p. 245:
Franklin Roosevelt, inaugural address of 1933 (Washington,
DC: National Archives and Records Administration, 1988)
22; p. 246: George F. Will, “‘Let Us . . .’? No, Give It
a Rest,” Newsweek 22 January 2001: 64; p. 246: ­
Caesar;
p. 247: John F. Kennedy, inaugural address, 20 Jan. 1961,
in Bower Aly and Lucille F. Aly, eds., Speeches in ­
English
(New York: Random House, 1968) 272; p. 247: Barack
Obama, “Can We Honestly Say We’re Doing Enough?”
­
Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2013): 34–35; p. 248:
Barack Obama, “Look at the World Through Their Eyes,”
Vital Speeches of the Day (May 2013): 138–42; p. 248:
­
Roosevelt, inaugural address of 1933; p. 248: William
Faulkner, speech in acceptance of the Nobel Prize for
­
Literature, delivered 10 Dec. 1950, in Houston Peterson,
ed., A Treasury of the World’s Great Speeches (New York:
­
Simon & Schuster, 1965) 814–15; p. 248: David Brooks,
baccalaureate address at Sewanee: The University of
the South. Sewanee Today 11 May 2013; p. 249: Kennedy,
inaugural address
Chapter 13  p. 253: Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 3, Scene 2.
(1601); p. 254: James W. Gibson, John A. Kline, and Charles
R. Gruner, “A Reexamination of the First Course in Speech
at U.S. Colleges and Universities,” Speech Teacher 23 (Sept.
1974): 206–14; p. 258: Roger Ailes, You Are the Message (New
York: Doubleday, 1989) 37–38; Gellis Communications.
“Top Tips for Preparing and Delivering a Manuscript
Speech.” November 4,1 2011. http://www.gellis.com/blog/
top-tips-preparing-and-delivering-manuscript-speech;
Richardson, David W. “Delivering a Manuscript Speech.”
2013. http://www.richspeaking.com/articles/manuscript
_speech.html; p. 262: Cicero, De Oratore, vol. 4, translated
by E. W. Sutton (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1988); pp. 263–264: Khera Communications, ­
“Business
Tips for India,” More Business, 2001. 8 June 2004 www
.morebusiness.com/running_your_business/management/
d930585271.brc?highlightstring=Business+Tips+for+
India; p. 266: Executive Speeches: Tips on How to Write
and Deliver Speeches from 51 CEOs; p. 267: Albert Mehrabian,
­
Silent Messages (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1971); p. 274:
“Comment,” The New Yorker 1 Mar. 1993
Chapter 14  p. 289: Aristotle. On the Soul (350 BCE);
p. 292: Brent Filson, Executive Speeches: Tips on How to Write
and Deliver Speeches from 51 CEOs (New York: Wiley, 1994)
212; p. 294: Andrew Wilson, “In Defense of Rhetoric,”
Toastmaster 70.2 (Feb. 2004): 8–11; p. 297: CBS News, (2013).
Number Of Smartphone Users Top 1 Billion. [online]
[viewed 01/05/13] access: http://www.cbsnews.com/
8301-205_162-57534583/study-number-of-smartphone-
users-tops-1-billion/Contact:CBSNews.com contact form:
http://www.cbsnews.com/htdocs/feedback/fb_news_
form.shtml]]; p. 299: Used with permission by Connie
Malamed
Chapter 15  p. 315: Cicero. De Legibus, II, 19. Born: January
3,106 BC, Died: December 7, 43 BC; p. 326: Heath and
Heath, Made to Stick, 63–64; p. 327: Marcie Groover,
­
“Learning to Communicate: The Importance of Speech
­
Education in Public Schools,” Winning Orations 1984
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1984) 7;
p. 329: As cited by Eleanor Doan, The New Speaker’s
­Sourcebook (Grand ­
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1968); p. 330:
Heath and Heath, Made to Stick, 63–64
Chapter 16  p. 343: Shakespeare; p. 356: Based on
Maslow, Abraham (1954). Motivation and Personality. New
York: HarperCollins; p. 357: John Ryan, “Emissions
­
Tampering: Get the Lead Out,” Winning Orations 1985.
­
Interstate Oratorical Association, Mankato, MN, Editor
Larry Schnoor
Chapter 17  p. 371: Ralph Waldo Emerson 1803–1882;
p. 372: Donald C. Bryant, “Rhetoric: Its Functions and Its
Scope,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 39 (Dec. 1953): 26; p. 384:
Jeffrey E. Jamison, “Alkali Batteries: Powering Electronics
and Polluting the Environment,” Winning Orations 1991
(Mankato, MN: Interstate Oratorical Association, 1991) 43;
p. 385: Myron W. Lustig and Jolene Koester, Intercultural
Competence: Interpersonal Communication Across Cultures
(Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2009); p. 389: Jamie Frater, “Top 10
Great Historic Speeches,” http://listverse.com/
2008/06/01/top-10-great-historic-speeches/ ­
accessed June
14, 2013; p. 392: “Franklin Delano Roosevelt: The Great
­
Depression.” 6 June 2004; p. 394: Donald C. ­
Bryant,
Z05_BEEB3981_05_SE_CREDIT_474-479.indd 477 11/20/14 1:57 PM
Credits
﻿
478
“Rhetoric: Its Functions and Its Scope,” Quarterly Journal of
Speech 39 (Dec. 1953): 26; pp. 400–402: “Colter Ray, “You
Are What You Eat: Why You Should Eat Grass Fed Organic
Beef,” Original speech presented at Texas State University,
2013. Used by permission; pp. 403–404: Tasha Carlson,
­
“License to Save.” From Winning Orations 2009. Interstate
Oratorical Association, 2009, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry
Schnoor; pp. 405–406: Heather Zupanic, “End the Use
Child ­
Soldiers.” Speech excerpts on pages 363 through 365
from Winning Orations 2009. Interstate Oratorical Associa-
tion, Mankato, MN, Editor Larry Schnoor
Chapter 18  p. 413: Barney Frank, Harvard Commence-
ment Speech, 2012; p. 419: Copyrighted by Pearson Educa-
tion, Upper Saddle River, NJ; p. 421: Sarah Husberg, “A
Wedding Toast,” in Tasha Van Horn, Lori Charron, and
­
Michael Charron, eds., Allyn & Bacon Video II User’s Guide,
2002; p. 421: Jeff Brooks, Wedding Toasts. March 1998.
(http://zinnia.umfacad.maine.edu/~donaghue/toasts07
.html; p. 423: Everett M. Dirksen, “Nominating Speech for
Barry Goldwater” (15 July 1964), in James R. Andrews and
David Zarefsky, eds., Contemporary American Voices (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1965) 815; p. 423: Erma Bombeck,
“Abbreviated Thank-you’s Allow Us More Time to Study
Danson’s Head,” Austin American-Statesman 22 June 1993:
F3; p. 423: Cindy Pearlman, “Oscar Speeches: Statues in
Their Hands, Feet in Their Mouths,” Austin American-
Statesman 24 March 1997: E8; p. 424: Barbara Jordan,
“Change: From What to What?” Vital Speeches of the Day
(15 August 1992): 651; p. 424: David Abel, “Commence-
ment Addresses Leave Audiences Lost,” Boston Globe 5
June 2000: B4; p. 425: Richard Pérez-Peña, “In Looser Tone,
Speakers Urge Graduates to Take Risks and Be Engaged,”
The New York Times 15 June 2013; p. 425: “Mike Bloom-
berg’s Remarks from Stanford University’s 122nd Com-
mencement,” mikebloomberg.com 16 June 2013; p. 425:
Sylvia Earle, “The Best Time in History for Whatever
You’re Going to Do Next.” Vital Speeches of the Day (August
2012): 254–58; p. 425: David Abel, “Commencement
­
Addresses Leave Audiences Lost,” Boston Globe 5 June
2000: B4; p. 426: Bill Clinton, speech at Pointe du Hoc,
France (June 1994), as quoted in David Shribman,
­
“President, a Child of World War II, Thanks a Generation,”
Boston Globe 7 June 1994: 1; p. 426: Cyrus Copeland,
“Death, Be Not Ponderous,” New York Times 31 October
2004; p. 426: Veronique Pozner, “Momma Loves you, Little
Man,” Vital Speeches of the Day (February 2013): 36;
pp. 426–427: John T. Masterson, Jr., eulogy for Betty
Stalvey, New Braunfels, TX, 26 March 2005; p. 427: Dave
Barry, “Speak! Speak!” Austin American-Statesman 2 June
1991: C4; p. 428: Sarah Booth Conroy, “State Dinners Offer
Speech as First Course,” Austin American-Statesman 10
­
November 1989; p. 428: Debi Martin, “Laugh Lines,”
­
Austin American-Statesman 20 May 1988: D1; p. 428: Jon
Macks, How to Be Funny (New York: Simon & Schuster,
2003); p. 428: Matt Hughes, “Tricks of the Speechwriter’s
Trade,” Management Review 79 (November 1990): 56–58;
p. 428: Michael Koresky, “Prognosis: Dire, Michael
Moore’s ‘Sicko’,” indiewire 22 June 2007. Reprinted by
permission of SnagFilms, Inc.; p. 429: John C. Meyer,
­
“Humor as a ­
Double-Edged Sword: Four Functions of
­Humor in ­Communication,” Communication Theory 10
(August 2000): 311; p. 429: Joe Queenan, “How to Tell a
Joke,” Reader’s ­Digest September 2003: 73; p. 429: Michael
Blastland and David Spiegelhalter, The Norm Chronicles:
Stories and ­
Numbers about Danger (London: Profile Books,
2013) 42; p. 430: Mark Twain, “The Alphabet and Simpli-
fied Spelling,” address at the dedication of the New York
Engineers’ Club, 9 December 1907. Mark Twain’s Speeches;
with an ­
Introduction by William Dean Howells (University of
Virginia Library: Electronic Text Center); p. 430: Bill Gates,
2007 Harvard commencement address, Harvard University
­Gazette Online 7 June 2007; p. 430: Chris O’Keefe, untitled
speech, in John K. Boaz and James Brey, eds., 1987
­
Championship Debates and Speeches (Speech Communication
­
Association and American Forensic Association, 1987)
99; p. 430: “Mirren ‘Too Busy’ to Meet Queen,” BBC News
10 May 2007; p. 430: Susan Wallace, “Seriously, How Do I
Write a Humorous Speech?” as reported by Mike Dicerbo,
Leadership in Action 1 November 2000
Appendix A  p. 441: Kipling, “The Law of the Wolves,” in
“The Second Jungle Book” 1895; p. 442: Based on Kenneth D.
Benne and Paul Sheats, “Functional Roles of Group Mem-
bers,” Journal of Social Issues 4 (Spring 1948): 41–49
Appendix B  pp. 445–447: Writers House LLC; pp. 445–
447: © 1963 Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. © renewed 1991
Coretta Scott King. Used by permission of Writers House,
LLC; pp. 447–450: The White House; pp. 450–453: Daniel
Rose; pp. 453–454: Angelitta Armijo, Texas State
University
Photo
Chapter 1  p. 1: Rawpixel/Fotolia; p. 10: (left) Thelefty/
Fotolia; (middle) Library of Congress Prints and Photo-
graphs Division; (right) Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division[LC-DIG-hec-47601]
Chapter 2  p. 15: marcovarro/Shutterstock
Chapter 3  p. 29: Khakimullin Aleksandr/Shutterstock
Chapter 4  p. 49: STAN HONDA/Newscom
Chapter 5  p. 65: UpperCut Images/Alamy; p. 68: Hill
Street Studios/Blend Images/Alamy
Chapter 6  p. 95: Rawpixel/Fotolia; p. 110: (top left) Brian
Jackson/Fotolia; (top middle) Ryan DeBerardinis/Shutter-
stock; (top right) Endostock/Fotolia; (bottom left) German-
skydive110/Fotolia; (bottom right) Joe Sohm/Visions of
America, LLC/Alamy; p. 111: (top) nnv/Fotolia; (middle)
Vectomart/Shutterstock; (bottom) Pixelrobot/Fotolia;
p. 125: Michaeljung/Fotolia
Chapter 7  p. 131: sheff/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 8  p. 153: chesterF/Fotolia
Z05_BEEB3981_05_SE_CREDIT_474-479.indd 478 11/20/14 11:02 AM
Credits ﻿ 479
Chapter 9  p. 181: kantver/Fotolio
Chapter 10  p. 211: laflor/E+/Getty Images
Chapter 11  p. 227: Comstock/Stockbyte/Getty Images
Chapter 12  p. 235: Ocean/Corbis; p. 236: (top) Natalie
Fobes/Corbis; (middle) Ed Lefkowicz/Demotix/Corbis;
(bottom) Mark Rightmire/ZUMA Press/Corbis
Chapter 13  p. 253: Image Source/Alamy
Chapter 14  p. 289: Rawpixel/Fotolia
Chapter 15  p. 315: Spencer Grant/Alamy
Chapter 16  p. 343: stokkete/Fotolio
Chapter 17  p. 371: iofoto/Shutterstock
Chapter 18  p. 413: George Doyle/Getty Images
Z05_BEEB3981_05_SE_CREDIT_474-479.indd 479 11/20/14 11:02 AM
Index
A
ABA/Inform Global database, 158
Abstraction, ladder of, 238–239
Academic Search Complete database, 158
Acceptance speeches, 423–424
Accommodation, 57
Accomplishment, focusing on, 25
Action
appeals to, in conclusion, 230–231, 232
communication as, 5–6
in motivated sequence, 230, 407–408
Active listening, 79
Ad hominem approach, 387
Adapting to audience
audience analysis and, 103–104
diversity and, 111–114
language style and, 242–244
Adult learning, principles and techniques of,
325–326
African American Vernacular English (AAVE), 242
After this, therefore because of this fallacy (causal
fallacy), 386, 405
After-dinner speeches, 427–431
Age, in audience analysis, 105–106
Alliteration, 248, 250
American Civil Liberties Union, 52
Analogies
to clarify unfamiliar ideas, 326
reasoning by, 377–378
as supporting material, 169–170
Analysis, 437–438. See also Audience analysis
Analytical listeners, 79
Andragogy, 325–326
Anecdotes, 217–218
Animals, as presentation aids, 309
Antithesis, 248, 250
Anxiety. See Nervousness
APA (American Psychological Association) style,
60–61, 203
Appeals
to action, 230–231, 232
emotional, 389–394
fear, 358–360
to misplaced authority, 388
Apprehension. See Nervousness
Aristotle, 95, 289
on credibility, 51, 373
on delivery, 254
on ethics, 80
on persuasion, 85, 348–349, 350
Armijo, Angelitta, 453–454
Arousal, emotional responses and, 389–390
Arrangement, 10
Articulation, 270
Attending to sounds, 67
Attention
getting, 213–214, 292
maintaining, 292, 328–332
in motivated sequence, 405–406
presentation aids and, 292
timing use of visuals to control, 310
Attitudes
in audience analysis, 115–117
changing or reinforcing, 345
definition of, 345
Audience, 31–32
adapting to. See Adapting to audience
analyzing. See Audience analysis
attention of. See Attention
attitudes, beliefs, values, or behaviors of,
changing or reinforcing, 345–347
captive vs. voluntary, 116
customizing message to, 123–124
diversity of. See Audience diversity
expectations of, for delivery, 255–256
giving a reason to listen, 214
interest of, strategies to maintain, 328–332
knowing, 21
misconceptions of, correcting, 398
motivating to listen, 329
motivating to respond, 230–231
neutral, persuading, 396
persuasive speeches and, 360–362
positive, 25
recall of, strategies to enhance, 333–335
receptive, persuading, 394–395
size of, 118
strategies to enhance recall of, 333–335
strategies to maintain attention of, 328–332
target, focusing on, 112–113
topic selection and, 133–135
unreceptive, persuading, 396–397
Audience adaptation, 103–104
Audience analysis, 32, 95–129
adaptations based on, 103–104
after speaking, 125–127
480
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 480 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index ﻿ 481
Bar graphs, 297
Barrett, Harold, 80
Basic human needs, hierarchy of, 356–357, 359
Behavioral objectives, 141–142
Behavioral responses, in audience analysis,
126–127
Behaviors, changing or reinforcing, 347
Beliefs
in audience analysis, 115
changing or reinforcing, 346
in shared myths, using to persuade, 392–393
Benefits, 358
Berkeley Free Speech Movement, 52
Best, Joel, 172
Bibliographies, preliminary, 163
Blair, Tony, 414
Blastland, Michael, 429
Bloomberg, Michael, 425
Blueprints, 148–149
Bocelli, Andrea, 16
Body of speech, 38
Bombeck, Erma, 423
Bono, 231
Books, as supporting material, 160
Boolean searches, 156
Boom microphones, 275
Booth-Butterfield, Melanie, 22
Brainstorming, 136–137
Breathing, 22–23
Brief illustrations, as supporting material, 165
Broken wing posture, 264
Brooks, David, 248
Brown, Donald, 113–114
Bryan, William Jennings, 9
Bryant, Donald C., 394
Buffet, Warren, 4
Burke, Edmund, 9
Bush, Barbara, 428
Bush, George W., 57, 270, 414
C
Cadence, 247–249
Caesar, Julius, 123
Cameron, David, 167
Captive audiences, 116
Carey, Mariah, 16
Carlson, Tasha, 403–404
Causal fallacies, 386, 405
Causal reasoning, 380–381, 382, 383
Cause-and-effect organization, 188–189,
404–405, 408
before speaking, 105–120
customizing message and, 123–124
definition of, 101–102
demographic, 105–114
information gathering for, 98–101
for informative speeches, 336
nonverbal cues for, 120–123, 125–126
psychological, 115–117
situational, 117–120
while speaking, 120–124
Audience diversity
adapting to, 111–114, 242–244
analysis of, 105–111
delivery and, 276–278
diverse strategies for, 113–114
ethical speech and, 56–57
evidence and, 385
humor and, 220
information gathering about, 32
language and, 242–244
listening ethically and, 80–81
persuasive speeches and, 361–362
reasoning and, 381–382
Audience-centered delivery, 255
Audience-centered model of public speaking
audience analysis for, 97–98
audience as focus for, 30–31
central idea and, 143–144
delivery and, 280–282
evaluating speeches and, 85–87
group presentations and, 415–416
informative speeches and, 335–336
organizing speeches and, 183
persuasive speeches and, 97–98, 360, 361
presenting information that relates to
listeners and, 330
rehearsing and, 278–279
selecting and narrowing topic and, 133, 134
supporting material and, 155
workplace speaking and, 415
Audiovisual aids, 301–304
Auditory channel, 5, 6
Auditory learners, 327
Authoritarian leaders, 443
Authority, misplaced, appeals to, 388
Average style of communication anxiety, 19
Award presentations, 422
B
Baby boomers, 105–106
Bandwagon fallacy, 386
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 481 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index
﻿
482
Complete declarative sentences, 145
Complexity, organizing by, 185, 193
Computer-generated presentation aids, 300–301,
302. See also Keynote; PowerPoint; Prezi
Computers, as presentation aids, 303
Conclusions (in reasoning), 379
Conclusions (of speeches), 38, 227–234
inspirational appeals or challenges in, 232
knowing, 22
purposes of, 228–231
references to introduction in, 231–232
Confidence, 15–27
building, 21–26
understanding your nervousness and, 17–20
Conflict management, in small groups, 441
Confrontational style of communication
anxiety, 20
Connotation, 240–241
Consensus, 439
Context, 7
Contradiction, gestures for, 264–265
Conversation, platform, 256
Cook, Tim, 276
Coordinators, for group presentations, 418
Costolo, Dick, 216
Country codes, 156
Courage, appeals to, 392
Couric, Katie, 16
Cowan, Gloria, 55
Credibility, 50–51
audience attitude and, 117
elements of, 373–374
establishing, 215–216, 372–375
of evidence, 384
eye contact and, 262
phases of, 374–375
Crisis rhetoric, 245
Critical listeners, 79
Critical listening, 81–84
Critical thinking, 3–4, 82
Criticism, 88. See also Feedback
rhetorical, 85
Cross-cultural approach, to persuasion, 361–362
Cultural anthropologists, 113–114
Culture
in audience analysis, 32, 107–108
describing and adapting to, 109
eye contact and, 262
gestures and, 263–264
organization and, 191
reasoning and, 381–382
Cunningham, Michael, 165
Central ideas, 35
audience-centered, 146
complete, declarative sentence, 145
developing, 143–146
for informative speeches, 337–338
for persuasive speeches, 363–367
reemphasizing in conclusions, 228–229
single, 145
Ceremonial speaking, 420–427
Chalkboards, as presentation aids, 300
Challenges, in conclusion, 232
Channels, in communication process, 5–6
Charisma, 374
Charts, as presentation aids, 298–299
Cheney, Dick, 243
Chesterton, G. K., 329
Chestnutt, Charles W., 215
Christ, Carol, 52
Christie, Chris, 223
Chronological organization, 186–187
Churchill, Winston, 16, 247
Cicero, 8, 131, 315
Citations, 60–61
Clarity, speaking with, 324–325
Classification, definition by, 168
Clay, Henry, 9
Clemens, Clara, 120
Clemens, Samuel. See Twain, Mark
Clinton, Bill, 57, 259, 270, 274, 414, 426
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 57–58, 165
Closed-ended questions, 100, 101
Closure, providing in conclusion, 229–231
Coca-Cola Company, 247
Codes, 5
Cognitive dissonance, motivation and, 352,
353–355, 359
Colbert, Stephen, 273
Commemorative addresses, 425–426
Commencement addresses, 424–425
Commercial domains, 156
Common ground, with audience, establishing,
102–103
Common values, identifying, 113–114
Communication
as action, 5–6
as interaction, 6–7
nonverbal. See Nonverbal communication
in small groups. See Small group communication
as transaction, 7–8
Communications Decency Act of 1996, 53
Competence, credibility and, 373
Complementing, gestures for, 265
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 482 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index ﻿ 483
Downs, Daniel, 55
Drake, 105
Drama, creating, 246–247
Drawings, as presentation aids, 295
DVD players, as presentation aids, 303
Dynamism, credibility and, 374
E
Earle, Sylvia, 425
Early arrival, 281
Ebadi, Shirin, 53
Edison, Thomas, 292
Education, in audience analysis, 111
Educational domains, 156
Effective timing, 273
Einstein, Albert, 2
Either/or fallacy, 387
Ekman, Paul, 268
Elaboration, definition of, 350
Elaboration likelihood model (ELM) of
persuasion, 349–350, 351
Electronic devices, as presentation aids, 303
Elocution, 9
“Elvis” speech (Armijo), 453–454
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 135, 371
Emotional appeals, 389–394, 391–392
Emotional connections, formed through delivery,
256
Emotional contagion theory, 256
Emotional response theory, 389–390
Emphasis, gestures for, 265
Employers, skills valued by, 4
Employment, as reason to study public speaking,
4
Empowerment, 3–4
Encoding, 5
Energy, nervous, channeling, 23
Entertaining speeches, 34, 35, 140
Entertainment domains, 156
Enumeration, as transition, 196
Ethical listening, 80–81
Ethical speaking, message and, 87
Ethical speech, 55–61
avoiding plagiarism and, 58–61
diversity and, 56–57
emotional appeals and, 393
evidence and reasoning and, 56
goals and, 55–56
honesty and, 57–58
persuasive speeches and, 362
Ethics, 50–51
Ethnic vernacular, 242
D
Damned Lies and Statistics: Untangling Numbers
from the Media, Politicians, and Activists
(Best), 172
Databases, online, supporting material from,
158–159
Davis, Scott, 245
Declamation, 9
Deductive reasoning, 379–380, 382, 383
Definitions
by classification, 168
operational, 168
as supporting material, 168–169
DeGeneres, Ellen, 273
Delivery, 10, 42, 253–287
audience diversity and, 276–278
audience-centered, 255
emotional connections formed through, 256
eye contact and, 262–263
facial expression and, 268–269
gestures and, 263–265, 266
of informative speeches, 339
listeners’ expectations for, 255–256
methods of, 257–261
movement during, 265–267
nonverbal behavior during, 256
of persuasive speeches, 368
posture and, 267–268
questions following, responding to, 282–284
rehearsal and, 278–280
tips for enhancing, 280–282
vocal, 269–275
Demagogues, 393
Democratic leaders, 443
Demographic audience analysis, 105–115
Demographics, 99
Deng Xiaoping, 55
Denotation, 240
Derived credibility, 374–375
Descriptions, as supporting material, 167–168
Dewey, John, 82, 437
Dialects, 270–271
Dianetics, 108
Direct persuasion route, 350
Direct, specific language, 145
Dirksen, Everett, 422–423
Disposition, 38
Distractions, as barrier to listening, 70–71
Diversity. See Audience diversity
Domains, 156
Dominance, emotional responses and, 389–390
Douglass, Frederick, 9, 215
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 483 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index
﻿
484
Fig leaf posture, 264
Figurative analogies, 169–170
Figures of speech, 245–246
Filson, Brent, 266
Final credibility, 375
Final summaries, 197
Fiorina, Carly S., 425
First Amendment, 52, 54
Fitzpatrick, Kathy, 57
Flesh wound posture, 264
Flowcharts, as presentation aids, 299
Forum presentations, 416
Frank, Barney, 413
Free speech, 50, 51–55
FreeSpeechDebate.com, 53
Fringer, Roger, 331–332
Frost, Robert, 266
G
Gates, Bill, 430
Gehrig, Lou, 228
Geise, Brianne, 203
Gender, in audience analysis, 106–107
General purpose, 34, 140–141. See also
Entertaining speeches; Informative
speeches; Persuasive speeches
Generation X, 105–106
Gestures
awkward, 264
delivery and, 263–265
effective, 266
functions of, 264–265
to reinforce main ideas, 335
Goals
ethical speech and, 55–56
listening, 75–77
of persuasive speeches, 345–348
Goldwater, Barry, 422–423
Google, 156
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 9
Gore, Al, 160, 414
Government domains, 156
Graham, Billy, 395
Grandin, Tom, 133
Graphs, as presentation aids,
296–298
Grimke, Angelina, 9
Gronbeck, Bruce, 135
Group membership, in audience
analysis, 108–110
Group presentations, 415–419
Ethnicity, in audience analysis, 107–108
Ethnocentrism, 108, 276
Ethos, 51, 348–349, 373
Eulogies, 426–427
Evaluating Internet resources, 157–158
Evaluating speeches, 84–91
criteria for, 85, 87
feedback and, 88–91
rhetorical strategies and, 87–88
Events
references to, in introductions, 222–223
speeches about, 321–322, 323
Evidence, 376. See also Supporting material
ethical speech and, 56
evaluating, 82–83
soft and hard, 193–194
Exaggeration, 430
Examples
concrete, using emotion to persuade
and, 390
as evidence, 383
Expectations, of audience for delivery, 255–256
Expert testimony, 174
Explanations
of presentation aids, 308
as supporting material, 167–168
Extemporaneous speaking, 259–261
Extended illustrations, as supporting materials,
165–166
External noise, 6
Eye contact
delivery and, 262–263
practicing, 41
with presentation aids, avoiding, 308
F
Facial expression, delivery and, 268–269
Fact, propositions of, 364–365
Facts
as evidence, 383
inferences vs., 82
in introductions, 217–218
startling, in introductions, 218
Fallacies, 386–388
Fallon, Jimmy, 273
Faulkner, William, 248
Faulty reasoning, 386–388
Fear appeals, 358–360, 391
Features, 358
Feedback, 7. See also Criticism
giving to others, 88–90
giving to self, 90–91
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 484 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index ﻿ 485
Informative speeches, 34, 35, 140, 315–341
audience-centered, 335–339
goals of, 317
interest in, maintaining, 328–332
recall of, enhancing, 333–335
sample, 331–332
types of, 318–323
understanding of, enhancing, 324–328
Initial credibility, 374
Initial previews, 195
Insensitive style of communication anxiety, 19–20
Interactive model of communication, 6–7
Interest, strategies to maintain, 328–332
Internal noise, 6
Internal previews, 195
Internal summaries, 197–198
Internet
evaluating resources on, 157–158
as presentation aid, 304
supporting material from, 155–158
Interviews
conducting, 161–162
preparing for, 161
supporting material from, 160–162
Intonation, 271
Introduction, speeches of, 420–421
Introductions (of speeches), 38, 211–225
anecdotes in, 217–218
familiarity with, 22
humor in, 219–220
illustrations in, 217–218
personal references in, 223
purposes of, 213–217
questions in, 220–222
quotations in, 218–219
references to, in conclusion, 231–232
references to events in, 222–223
references to occasion in, 223
references to preceding speeches in, 223–224
startling facts or statistics in, 218
Invention, 10
Inversion, 247, 250
Irony, verbal, 430
Isocrates, 85
I-statements, 89
J
Jackson, Jesse, 357
Jagland, ThrobjØrn, 169–170
Jamison, Jeffrey, 384
Jargon, 242
H
Handouts, 309–310
Hands in pockets posture, 264
Hard evidence, 193–194
Hasty generalization, 387
Henry, Patrick, 9, 392
Hernandez, Maria, 395
Heywood, John, 227
Hitler, Adolf, 52, 55
Holm, Todd, 59
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 135
Hong, Yue, 120
Hope, appeals to, 392
Hostile questions, neutralizing, 283–284
Howells, William Dean, 135
How-to explanations, 186–187
Humes, James, 3–4
Humor
in after-dinner speeches, 428–429
diversity and, 220
in introductions, 219–220
verbal strategies for, 429–430
Humphrey, Judith, 144
Hyperbole, 430
Hypothetical illustrations, as supporting
materials, 166
I
“I Have a Dream” speech (King), 232, 260, 273,
445–447
Ideas. See also Central ideas; Main ideas
speeches about, 322–323
unfamiliar, clarifying, 326–329
Illustrations
hypothetical, 166
in introductions, 217–218
as supporting material, 165–166
Immediacy, 267
Immediacy behaviors, 267
Impromptu speaking, 259, 261
Inclusive language, 107
Income, in audience analysis, 111
Indirect persuasion route, 350
Inductive reasoning, 376–379, 382
Inferences, 383
facts vs., 82
Inflection, 272–273
Inflexible style of communication anxiety, 20
Information gathering, for audience analysis,
99–101
Information overload, 69, 70
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 485 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index
﻿
486
Line graphs, 297, 298
Listening, 65–93
active, 79
analyzing and evaluating speeches and, 84–91
barriers to, overcoming, 69–72
critical, 81–84
definition of, 67
effective, 67–69
ethical, 80–81
giving audience a reason to listen and, 214
goal of, 75–77
improving, 73–81
for major ideas, 77–78
mindful, 74–75
motivating audience to listen and, 329
practicing, 78
in small groups, 441
styles of, 78–79
for topic ideas, 137–138
Listening styles, 78–79
Literal analogies, 169
Literary quotations, 174–175
Location, in audience analysis, 118
Logic, evaluating, 83–84
Logical divisions, 146–147
Logos, 349, 350
Longfellow Henry Wadsworth, 135
Louis C. K., 140
Lustig, Myron, 385
Luther, Martin, 8
M
MacArthur, Douglas, 220, 389
Macks, Jon, 428
Madison, James, 52
Main ideas, 35–36
generating, 146–148
for informative speeches, 338
keeping short and simple, 333–334
listening for, 77–78
organizing, 183–191
for persuasive speeches, 363–367
previewing, 148–149, 216–217
reinforcing, 334–335
restating in conclusion, 229
Maintenance leaders, 442
Major premises, 379
Malapropisms, 430
Manuscript speaking, 257–258, 261
Maps, as presentation aids, 296
Marchionne, Sergio, 174
Jefferson, Thomas, 52
Jessel, George, 15
Johnson, Lyndon B., 270
Jordan, Barbara, 239, 424
JSTOR database, 158
K
Keillor, Garrison, 140
Kennedy, John F., 16, 247, 249, 270, 273, 389
Kennedy, Robert, 189
Kent, Muhtar, 221
Key points. See Main ideas
Keynote, 37, 300, 301
Keynote addresses, 424
Khalifa, Wiz, 105
Kinesthetic learners, 328
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 9, 189, 232, 248, 259–260,
273, 445–447
Kingsolver, Barbara, 58
Kipling, Rudyard, 441
KISS principle, 334
Koester, Jolene, 385
Kroc, Ray, 437
L
La Guardia, Fiorello, 263
Ladders of abstraction, 238–239
Laissez-faire leaders, 443
Language. See also Words
direct, specific, 145
inclusive, 107
respectful, 243
sexist, 243–244
unbiased, 107, 243–244
Language styles
adapting to listeners, 242–244
oral vs. written, 237–238
Lavaliere microphones, 275
Lay testimony, 174
Leadership, 441–444
Leadership styles, 443–444
Learning styles, varied, appealing to, 327–328
Leave It to Beaver (TV show), 392
Lehrman, Robert, 228–229
Leno, Jay, 429
Letterman, David, 273, 274
Lewinsky, Monica, 57
Lewis, C. S., 337–338
LexisNexis Academic database, 158
Libraries, traditional, supporting material from,
159–160
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 486 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index ﻿ 487
N
Narration, about speaking technique, 241
National Communication Association (NCA), 85,
110
Credo for Communication Ethics of, 51
Needs
of audience, motivation and, 352, 355–357
in motivated sequence, 406
Negative motivation, 352, 358–360
Nervousness, 17–20
causes of, 17–18
overcoming. See Confidence
pattern of, 18–20
News domains, 156
Newspaper Source database, 158
Nichols, Ralph, 77
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 174
Nixon, Richard, 186
Noise, in communication process, 6
Nomination speeches, 422–423
Non sequiturs, 388
Nonverbal communication, 255
in audience analysis, 120–123, 125–126
to communicate emotional response, 390–391
during delivery, 256
humorous, 430–431
listening and, 73–74
responding to, 121–123
to signal end of speech, 229–230
Nonverbal expectancy theory, 255
Nonverbal transitions, 196–197
Noonan, Peggy, 235, 244
Nooyi, Indra, 170
Note taking, 163
Notes, speaking, 199, 205–207
Novelty, to maintain interest of audience, 330–332
O
Obama, Barack, 51–52, 77, 228, 247, 248, 265, 270,
447–450
Objects
as presentation aids, 293, 308–309
speeches about, 318–319, 323
O’Brien, Conan, 16
Occasion
in audience analysis, 118–120
references to, in introductions, 223
Occupation, in audience analysis, 111
O’Keefe, Chris, 430
Olasky, Martin, 219
Omission, 246, 250
Maslow, Abraham, 356, 357, 359
Masterson, John T., Jr., 426–427
Matures, 105–106
McCarthy, Joseph, 56, 393
Mehrabian, Albert, 267
Memorized speaking, 258, 261
Memory, 10
listening and, 68
presentation aids to enhance, 291
strategies to enhance, 333–335
“Message. Messenger. Audience speech” (Rose),
450–453
Messages
in communication process, 5
customizing to audience, 123–124
ethical, 87
focusing on, 24
inclusive, 107
Metaphors, 245, 391
Meyers, Seth, 273
Microphone use, 274–275
Military domains, 156
Millenials, 105–106
Minaj, Nicki, 105
Minor premises, 379
Mirren, Helen, 430
Misconceptions, correcting, 398
Misplaced authority, appeals to, 388
MLA (Modern Language Association) style,
60–61, 203
Models, as presentation aids, 294
Moderators, for group presentations, 418
Monroe, Alan, 405
Montana Sedition Act of 1918, 53
Moore, Michael, 428
Mother Teresa, 392
Motivated sequence, 230, 405–408
Motivation, 349, 352–360. See also Persuasion;
Persuasive speeches
cognitive dissonance and, 352,
353–355, 359
listeners’ needs and, 352,
355–357, 359
negative, 352, 358–360
positive, 352, 358
Mott, Lucretia, 9
Movement
delivery and, 265–267
to reinforce main ideas, 335
Murphy’s Law, 311
Myths, shared, using to persuade,
392–393
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 487 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index
﻿
488
People
as presentation aids, 294–295
speeches about, 321, 323
Pep talks, mental, 24
Personal appearance, 275–276
Personal concerns, as barrier to listening, 69–70
Personal domains, 156
Personal knowledge and experience, supporting
material from, 154–155
Personal references, in introductions, 223
Personification, 245
Persuasion. See also Motivation; Persuasive
speeches
Arisotle’s traditional approach to, 348–349, 351
definition of, 345
direct and indirect routs of, 350
elaboration likelihood model of, 349–350
Persuasive speeches, 34, 35, 140, 343–370,
371–411. See also Motivation
Aristotle’s traditional approach to, 348–349
audience considerations for, 360–362
central idea and main ideas for, 363–367
combined approach to, 351
credibility and, 372–375
delivering, 368
elaboration likelihood model and, 349–350
emotion and, 389–394
goals of, 345–348
neutral audiences and, 396
organizing, 367–368, 398–408
purpose for, 363
reasoning and, 376–388
receptive audiences and, 394–395
rehearsing, 368
sample, 400–402
supporting material for, 367, 382–385
topic selection and narrowing for, 362
unreceptive audiences and, 396–397
Phillips, Terry, 53
Photographs, as presentation aids, 295–296
Physiological needs, 356–357
Physiological noise, 6
Picture graphs, 297, 299
Pie graphs, 297, 298
Pitch, 272–273
Plagiarism, avoiding, 58–61
Platform conversation, 256
Pleasure, emotional responses and, 389–390
Plutarch, 65
Policy, propositions of, 364, 366–367
Politics, in audience analysis, 109
Pontin, Jason, 50
Online databases, supporting material from,
158–159
Open-ended questions, 100, 101
Operational definitions, 168
Opinions
as evidence, 383–384
as supporting material, 173–176
Oral citations, 60
Oral language style, 237–238
Organization, 22, 38–42
cause-and-effect, 188–189
chronological, 186–187
cultural differences in, 191
divisions for, 38. See also Body of speech;
Conclusions (of speeches); Introductions
(of speeches)
for effect, 322
for informative speeches, 338
by listeners, presentation aids to enhance,
291–292
of main ideas, 183–191
outlining for. See Outlines; Preparation
outlines
of persuasive speeches, 367–368,
398–408
presentation aids for, 40–41
problem-solution, 189–190
rehearsing, 41–42
signposts for, 194–198
spatial, 187–188
topical, 184–186
Organizational domains, 156
Orwell, George, 240
Osgood, Charles, 162
Outlines, 38–40. See also Preparation
outlines
evaluating speech using, 202
sample, 203–205
Oz, Dr., 137
P
Pacing, information flow, 334
Panel discussions, 416
Parade rest posture, 264
Parallelism, 248, 250
Parnell, Charles, 199
Patchwriting, 58
Pathos, 349
Patriot Act, 53
Pauses, 273
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich, 153
Pedagogy, 325
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 488 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index ﻿ 489
Public speaking. See also Speeches; specific types of
speeches
as communication process, 5–8
definition of, 2–3
history of, 8–11
reasons to study, 3–4
seeking opportunities for, 25–26
The Publication Manual of the American
Psychological Association, 58
Public-relations speeches, 419
Puns, 429
Purpose, 33–35, 139–143
general, 34, 140–141. See also Entertaining
speeches; Informative speeches;
Persuasive speeches
of group presentations, 417
informative, determining, 337–338
for interviews, 161
of introductions, 213–217
of persuasive speeches, 363
specific, 34–35, 141–143
Q
Questions
following delivery, responding to, 282–284
following group presentations, 418
hostile, neutralizing, 283–284
in introductions, 220–222
open- and closed-ended, 100, 101
opening, delivering, 221
rhetorical, 221
following speech, responding to, 282–284
Quintilian, 8, 51, 254, 373
Quotations
in introductions, 218–219
literary, 174–175
R
Race, in audience analysis, 107–108
Ransom, Harry, 175
Ray, Colter, 400–402
Reading
speeches, 257–258, 261
for topic ideas, 137–138
Reagan, Ronald, 9, 294, 414
Reasoning, 376–388
by analogy, 377–378
causal, 380–381, 382, 383
culturally diverse audiences and, 381–382
deductive, 379–380, 382, 383
ethical speech and, 56
Porter, Richard, 114
Positive motivation, 352, 358
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc (causal fallacy), 386, 405
Posture, delivery and, 267–268
PowerPoint, 37, 300, 301, 334
Practicing, 22. See also Rehearsal
listening, 78
Preceding speeches, references to, in
introductions, 223–224
Prejudice, as barrier to listening,
71–72
Preliminary bibliographies, 163
Preparation, 21–22
Preparation outlines, 198–205
developing, 199–202
standard outline form for,
200–201, 206
Preparing, for interviews, 161
Presentation aids, 40–41, 289–314
audiovisual, 301–304
computer-generated, 300–301, 302
dangerous or illegal, 307
definition of, 290–291
developing, guidelines for, 305–307
for group presentations, 418
identifying, 163–164
selecting, 306–307
three-dimensional, 293–295
two-dimensional, 295–300
use of, guidelines for, 307–312
value of, 291–293
Previews, 194–195, 216–217
Prezi, 37, 300, 301
Pride, appeals to, 392
Primacy, organizing by, 184, 192
Primary sources, 171
Problem solving, in small groups and teams,
436–440
Problem-solution organization, 189–190,
399–403, 408
Procedures, speeches about, 319–320, 323
Processes, complex, clarifying, 326–329
Procrastination, 21
Proenza, Luis, 221
Pronunciation, 271–272
Proof, 376
Propositions
of fact, 364–365
of policy, 364, 366–367
of value, 364, 365–366
Psychological audience analysis, 115–117
Psychological noise, 6
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 489 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index
﻿
490
Robinson, James W., 232
Roker, Al, 16
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 9, 273, 392
Rose, Daniel, 450–453
Rowland, Robert, 87
Rudd, Kevin, 165
S
Safety needs, 357
Safire, William, 243
Sajak, Pat, 274
Samovar, Larry, 114
Satisfaction, in motivated sequence, 406
Schnabel, Arthur, 274
The School for Scandal (Sheridan), 430
Schwab, Charles M., 1
Schweitzer, Brian, 53
Scientology, 108
Second Inaugural Address (Obama), 77, 447–450
Secondary sources, 171
Sedition Act, 52
Seidenberg, Ivan, 171
Seinfeld, Jerry, 16
Selecting sounds, 67
Self-actualization needs, 357
Self-esteem needs, 357
Sentences, short, 246
Sequences, of events or procedures, presentation
aids to help illustrate, 292
Service groups, in audience analysis, 110
Sex, 106
Sexist language, 243–244
Sexual orientation, in audience analysis, 106–107
Shakespeare, William, 123, 253, 343
Shepard, Judy, 21
Shepard, Matthew, 21
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, 430
Sign, reasoning by, 378–379
Signposts, 194–198, 216
Silence, 274
Similes, 245, 391
Simon, Carly, 16
Situational audience analysis, 117–120
Slander, 52
Sleep, 281
Small group communication, 435–444
leadership and, 441–444
participation in, 440–441
problem solving and, 436–440
Social groups, in audience analysis, 110
Social judgment theory, 363
Social needs, 357
Reasoning (continued)
evaluating, 83–84
faulty, 386–388
inductive, 376–379, 382
by sign, 378–379
supporting with evidence, 382–385
Recall. See Memory
Receiver, in communication process, 6
Recency, organizing by, 185, 192
Red herring fallacy, 387–388
Redundancy, to enhance audience recall, 333
Reference resources, 160
Reflective thinking, 437
Refutation, to organize persuasive speeches,
403–404, 408
Regionalisms, 242
Regulation, gestures for, 265
Rehearsal
delivery and, 278–280
for extemporaneous speaking, 261
of facial expressions, 268
of informative speeches, 338–339
of persuasive speeches, 368
with presentation aids, 307–308
tips for, 278–280
Reinforcing, main ideas, 334–335
Relational-oriented listeners, 78
Relationships, 103
Religion, in audience analysis, 108
Reluctant testimony, 384
Remembering. See also Memory
listening and, 68
Repetition
to create cadence, 248, 250
gestures for, 264
Research strategies, for supporting material, 162–164
Responding, 68
Responses
in audience analysis, 125–127
emotional, 389–390
motivating audience to respond and, 230–231
to nonverbal cues, 121–123
Reverence, appeals to, 392
Rhetoric, 8, 85, 348
crisis, 245
visual, 292
Rhetorical criticism, 85
Rhetorical questions, 221
Rhetorical strategies, 87–88
Rice, Susan, 57–58
Roberts, Julia, 16
Roberts, Paul, 240
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 490 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index ﻿ 491
definitions as, 168–169
descriptions as, 167–168
explanations as, 167–168
illustrations as, 165–166
for informative speeches, 338
integrating, 191–194
interesting, 36–37
from Internet, 155–158
from interviews, 160–162
from online databases, 158–159
opinions as, 173–176
from personal knowledge and experience,
154–155
for persuasive speeches, 367
research strategies for, 162–164
statistics as, 170–173
from traditional library holdings, 159–160
visual, 37
Surprise, to maintain interest of audience,
330–332
Surveys
in audience analysis, 100–101
postspeech, 126
Suspension, 247, 250
Syllogisms, 379
Symbols, 85
Symposia, 416
T
Target audience, focusing on, 112–113
Task leaders, 442
Task-oriented listeners, 78
Teams, 435–440
problem solving in, 436–440
Technology
presentation aids and, 311
for speaking notes, 205–206
Terminal credibility, 375
Testimony
expert, 174
lay, 174
reluctant, 384
Theses. See Central ideas
Thinking
critical, 3–4, 82
reflective, 437
Thomas, Helen, 53
Time
in audience analysis, 117–118
chronological organization and, 186–187
Timing, effective, 273
Toasts, 421–422
Socioeconomic status, in audience analysis,
110–111
Soft evidence, 193–194
Source, in communication process, 5
Sources
acknowledging, 59–60
citing correctly, 60–61
primary, 171
secondary, 171
unbiased, 171
Spatial organization, 187–188
Speaking notes, 199, 205–207
Specific purpose, 34–35, 141–143
Specificity, organizing by, 193
“Speech acts,” 53
Speech rate, 72, 271, 273
Speech topics. See Topics
Speeches. See also Public speaking; specific
types of speeches
canons for preparing and presenting, 10
preceding, references to, 223–224
Spiegelhalter, David, 429
Spooner, William, 429
Spoonerisms, 429
Springsteen, Bruce, 424
Stacks, 160
Standard American English (SAE), 242
Standard outline form, 200–201, 206
Starks, Cynthia, 189, 222
Startling facts or statistics, in introductions, 218
Stationary microphones, 275
Statistics
as evidence, 384
in introductions, 217–218
as supporting material, 170–173
Stereotypes, avoiding, 107
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 188
Stewart, Jon, 273
Stories
evidence to tell, 385
humorous, 429
to maintain audience attention, 329–330
Streisand, Barbra, 16
Style, 10, 42
Subjects of speeches. See Topics
Substitution, gestures for, 265
Success, visualizing, 23–24, 282
Summaries, 197–198
Summarizing, in conclusions, 228–229
Supporting material, 36–38, 153–179
analogies as, 169–170
best, determining, 176–177
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 491 11/19/14 4:21 PM
Index
﻿
492
Vocal delivery, 269–275
Vocalized pauses, 273–274
Volume of speech, 269–270
Voluntary audiences, 116
W
Wales, Jimmy, 53
Wayne, John, 423
Wayne, Lil, 105
Web directories, for topic selection, 138
Webster, Daniel, 9, 29, 273
Whiteboards, as presentation aids, 300
Whittier, John Greenleaf, 135
Wiesel, Elie, 9
Wikipedia, 157–158
Will, George F., 246
Williams, Brian, 232
Williams, Charles, 96
Williams, Doug, 232
Williams, Robin, 428
Wilson, Woodrow, 37
Winfrey, Oprah, 16, 49, 53
Wit, 430. See also Humor
Wood, Karen, 330
Words, 238–242
adding no meaning, eliminating, 241
concise use of, 241–242
correct use of, 240–241
descriptive, 326–327
emotion-arousing, 390
memorable word structures and, 244–250
simple, 240
specific, concrete, 238–239
Work groups, in audience analysis, 110
Working memory theory of listening, 69
Workplace speaking, 415–419
World Wide Web, 155
Written citations, 60
Written language style, 237–238
Y
Yin Ping, 74–75
You-statements, 89
Z
Zakaria, Fareed, 133
Zupanic, Heather, 405–408
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 428
Topical organization, 184–186
Topics
introducing, 215
narrowing, 32–33, 138–139, 337
selecting, 21, 32–33, 133–138, 337, 362
Transactive model of communication, 7–8
Transformational leaders, 444
Transitions, 195–197, 267
Translators, 278
Trudeau, Garry, 424–425
Truman, Harry S, 104, 389
Trump, Donald, 414
Trustworthiness, credibility and, 373
Truth, Sojourner, 9
Turnitin, 59
Twain, Mark, 9, 120, 135, 273, 430
U
Unbiased language, 107
Unbiased sources, 171
Understanding, 67
presentation aids to enhance, 291
strategies to enhance, 324–328
Understatement, 430
V
Value, propositions of, 364, 365–366
Values
in audience analysis, 115
changing or reinforcing, 346–347
common, identifying, 113–114
Variety in speech, 272–274
Verbal cues, to signal end of speech, 229–230
Verbal irony, 430
Verbal responses, in audience analysis, 126
Verbal transitions, 195–196
Vertical search engines, 156
Video presentation aids, 303–304
Visual brainstorming, 136–137
Visual channel, 5–6
Visual images, to invoke emotions, 391
Visual learners, 328
Visual materials, to transcend language
differences, 114
Visual print learners, 327
Visual rhetoric, 292
Visualization, in motivated sequence, 406–407
Vocal cues, to reinforce main ideas, 335
Z06_BEEB3981_05_SE_INDX_480-492.indd 492 11/19/14 4:21 PM
